

================================================================================
SOURCE: CBD — Nagoya Protocol resources.pdf
================================================================================

NAGOYA PROTOCOL ON
ACCESS TO GENETIC RESOURCES
AND THE FAIR AND EQUITABLE
SHARING OF BENEFITS ARISING
FROM THEIR UTILIZATION
TO THE
CONVENTION ON BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY TExT AND ANNEx

NAGOYA PROTOCOL ON
ACCESS TO GENETIC RESOURCES
AND THE FAIR AND EQUITABLE
SHARING OF BENEFITS ARISING
FROM THEIR UTILIZATION
TO THE
CONVENTION ON BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY Text And Annex Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity Montreal Convention on Biological Diversity United Nations

Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefi t-sharing Introduction Th e Convention on Biological Diversity was opened for signature on 5 June 1992 at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (the Rio “Earth Summit”) and entered into force on 29 December 1993. Th e Convention is the only international instrument comprehensively addressing biological diversity.
Th e Convention’s three objectives are the conservation of biological diversity, the sustainable use of its components and the fair and equitable sharing of benefi ts arising from the utilisation of genetic resources.
To further advance the implementation of the third objective, the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg, September 2002) called for the negotiation of an international regime, within the framework of the Convention, to promote and safeguard the fair and equitable sharing of benefi ts arising from the utilisation of genetic resources. Th e Convention’s Conference of the Parties responded at its seventh meeting, in 2004, by mandating its Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group on Access and Benefi t-sharing to elaborate and negotiate an international regime on access to genetic resources and benefi t-sharing in order to eff ectively implement Articles 15 (Access to Genetic Resources) and 8(j) (Traditional Knowledge) of the Convention and its three objectives.
Aft er six years of negotiation, the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefi ts Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity was adopted at the tenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties on 29 October 2010, in Nagoya, Japan.
Th e Protocol signifi cantly advances the Convention’s third objective by providing a strong basis for greater legal certainty and transparency for both providers and users of genetic resources. Specifi c obligations to support compliance with domestic legislation or regulatory requirements of the Party providing genetic resources and contractual obligations refl ected in mutually agreed terms are a signifi cant innovation of the Protocol. Th ese compliance provisions as well as provisions establishing more predictable conditions for access to genetic resources will contribute to ensuring the sharing of benefi ts when genetic resources leave a Party providing genetic resources. In addition, the Protocol’s provisions on access to traditional knowledge held by indigenous and local communities when it is associated with genetic resources will strengthen the ability of these communities to benefi t from the use of their knowledge, innovations and practices.
By promoting the use of genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge, and by strengthening the opportunities for fair and equitable sharing of benefi ts from their use, the Protocol will create incentives to conserve biological diversity, sustainably use its components, and further enhance the contribution of biological diversity to sustainable development and human well-being.
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity United Nations Environmental Programme 413 St. Jacques Street West, Suite 800 Montreal, Quebec, Canada H2Y 1N9 Phone: +1 (514) 288 2220 Fax: +1 (514) 288 6588 E-mail: secretariat@cbd.int Website: www.cbd.int © 2011 by the Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity All rights reserved. Published 2011 Printed in Canada ISBN: 92-9225-306-9 Th is publication may be reproduced for educational or non-profi t purposes without special permission from the copyright holders, provided acknowledgement of the source is made.
Th e Secretariat of the Convention would appreciate receiving a copy of the publications that use this document as a source.
Local catalogue record:
Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefi ts Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity : text and annex / Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity.
Summary: “Th is booklet contains the text and annex of the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefi ts Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity.”—Provided by publisher.
ISBN 92-9225-306-9
1. Biodiversity conservation — Law and legislation 2. Genetic resources conservation—Law and legislation 3. Biodiversity – International cooperation 4. Biodiversity conservation I. Convention on Biological Diversity (1992). Protocols, etc., 2010 Oct. 29. II. Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity (2010 : Nagoya, Japan). III. United Nations.
K3488 .A48 2011 For further information please contact the Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity

Determined to further support the effective implementation of the access and benefit-sharing provisions of the Convention, Recognizing that an innovative solution is required to address the fair and equitable sharing of benefits derived from the utilization of genetic resources and traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources that occur in transboundary situations or for which it is not possible to grant or obtain prior informed consent, Recognizing the importance of genetic resources to food security, public health, biodiversity conservation, and the mitigation of and adaptation to climate change, Recognizing the special nature of agricultural biodiversity, its distinctive features and problems needing distinctive solutions, Recognizing the interdependence of all countries with regard to genetic resources for food and agriculture as well as their special nature and importance for achieving food security worldwide and for sustainable development of agriculture in the context of poverty alleviation and climate change and acknowledging the fundamental role of the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture and the FAO Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture in this regard, Mindful of the International Health Regulations (2005) of the World Health Organization and the importance of ensuring access to human pathogens for public health preparedness and response purposes, Acknowledging ongoing work in other international forums relating to access and benefit-sharing, Recalling the Multilateral System of Access and Benefit-sharing established under the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture developed in harmony with the Convention, Recognizing that international instruments related to access and benefit-sharing should be mutually supportive with a view to achieving the objectives of the Convention, Recalling the relevance of Article 8(j) of the Convention as it relates to traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of such knowledge, Noting the interrelationship between genetic resources and traditional knowledge, their inseparable nature for indigenous and local communities, the importance of the traditional knowledge for the conservation of biological diversity and the sustainable use of its components, and for the sustainable livelihoods of these communities, Recognizing the diversity of circumstances in which traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources is held or owned by indigenous and local communities,
NAGOYA PROTOCOL ON ACCESS TO GENETIC
RESOURCES AND THE FAIR AND EQUITABLE SHARING OF
BENEFITS ARISING FROM THEIR UTILIZATION TO THE CONVENTION ON BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY The Parties to this Protocol, Being Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, hereinafter referred to as “the Convention”, Recalling that the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources is one of three core objectives of the Convention, and recognizing that this Protocol pursues the implementation of this objective within the Convention, Reaffirming the sovereign rights of States over their natural resources and according to the provisions of the Convention, Recalling further Article 15 of the Convention, Recognizing the important contribution to sustainable development made by technology transfer and cooperation to build research and innovation capacities for adding value to genetic resources in developing countries, in accordance with Articles 16 and 19 of the Convention, Recognizing that public awareness of the economic value of ecosystems and biodiversity and the fair and equitable sharing of this economic value with the custodians of biodiversity are key incentives for the conservation of biological diversity and the sustainable use of its components, Acknowledging the potential role of access and benefit-sharing to contribute to the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, poverty eradication and environmental sustainability and thereby contributing to achieving the Millennium Development Goals, Acknowledging the linkage between access to genetic resources and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of such resources, Recognizing the importance of providing legal certainty with respect to access to genetic resources and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from their utilization, Further recognizing the importance of promoting equity and fairness in negotiation of mutually agreed terms between providers and users of genetic resources, Recognizing also the vital role that women play in access and benefit-sharing and affirming the need for the full participation of women at all levels of policy-making and implementation for biodiversity conservation,

(e) “Derivative” means a naturally occurring biochemical compound resulting from the genetic expression or metabolism of biological or genetic resources, even if it does not contain functional units of heredity.

SCOPE This Protocol shall apply to genetic resources within the scope of Article 15 of the Convention and to the benefits arising from the utilization of such resources. This Protocol shall also apply to traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources within the scope of the Convention and to the benefits arising from the utilization of such knowledge.

RELATIONSHIP WITH INTERNATIONAL
AGREEMENTS AND INSTRUMENTS
1. The provisions of this Protocol shall not affect the rights and obligations of any Party deriving from any existing international agreement, except where the exercise of those rights and obligations would cause a serious damage or threat to biological diversity. This paragraph is not intended to create a hierarchy between this Protocol and other international instruments.
2. Nothing in this Protocol shall prevent the Parties from developing and implementing other relevant international agreements, including other specialized access and benefit-sharing agreements, provided that they are supportive of and do not run counter to the objectives of the Convention and this Protocol.
3. This Protocol shall be implemented in a mutually supportive manner with other international instruments relevant to this Protocol. Due regard should be paid to useful and relevant ongoing work or practices under such international instruments and relevant international organizations, provided that they are supportive of and do not run counter to the objectives of the Convention and this Protocol.
4. This Protocol is the instrument for the implementation of the access and benefit-sharing provisions of the Convention. Where a specialized international access and benefit-sharing instrument applies that is consistent with, and does not run counter to the objectives of the Convention and this Protocol, this Protocol does not apply for the Party or Parties to the specialized instrument in respect of the specific genetic resource covered by and for the purpose of the specialized instrument.
Mindful that it is the right of indigenous and local communities to identify the rightful holders of their traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources, within their communities, Further recognizing the unique circumstances where traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources is held in countries, which may be oral, documented or in other forms, reflecting a rich cultural heritage relevant for conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, Noting the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, and Affirming that nothing in this Protocol shall be construed as diminishing or extinguishing the existing rights of indigenous and local communities, Have agreed as follows:

OBJECTIVE The objective of this Protocol is the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources, including by appropriate access to genetic resources and by appropriate transfer of relevant technologies, taking into account all rights over those resources and to technologies, and by appropriate funding, thereby contributing to the conservation of biological diversity and the sustainable use of its components.

USE OF TERMS The terms defined in Article 2 of the Convention shall apply to this Protocol. In addition, for the purposes of this Protocol:
(a) “Conference of the Parties” means the Conference of the Parties to the Convention;
(b) “Convention” means the Convention on Biological Diversity;
(c) “Utilization of genetic resources” means to conduct research and development on the genetic and/or biochemical composition of genetic resources, including through the application of biotechnology as defined in Article 2 of the Convention;
(d) “Biotechnology” as defined in Article 2 of the Convention means any technological application that uses biological systems, living organisms, or derivatives thereof, to make or modify products or processes for specific use;

genetic resources where they have the established right to grant access to such resources.
3. Pursuant to paragraph 1 above, each Party requiring prior informed consent shall take the necessary legislative, administrative or policy measures, as appropriate, to:
(a) Provide for legal certainty, clarity and transparency of their domestic access and benefit-sharing legislation or regulatory requirements;
(b) Provide for fair and non-arbitrary rules and procedures on accessing genetic resources;
(c) Provide information on how to apply for prior informed consent;
(d) Provide for a clear and transparent written decision by a competent national authority, in a cost-effective manner and within a reasonable period of time;
(e) Provide for the issuance at the time of access of a permit or its equivalent as evidence of the decision to grant prior informed consent and of the establishment of mutually agreed terms, and notify the Access and Benefitsharing Clearing-House accordingly;
(f) Where applicable, and subject to domestic legislation, set out criteria and/or processes for obtaining prior informed consent or approval and involvement of indigenous and local communities for access to genetic resources; and (g) Establish clear rules and procedures for requiring and establishing mutually agreed terms. Such terms shall be set out in writing and may include, inter alia:
(i) A dispute settlement clause;
(ii) Terms on benefit-sharing, including in relation to intellectual property rights;
(iii) Terms on subsequent third-party use, if any; and (iv) Terms on changes of intent, where applicable.

ACCESS TO TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE ASSOCIATED WITH GENETIC RESOURCES In accordance with domestic law, each Party shall take measures, as appropriate, with the aim of ensuring that traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources that is held by indigenous and local communities is accessed with the prior and informed consent or approval and involvement of these indigenous and local communities, and that mutually agreed terms have been established.

FAIR AND EQUITABLE BENEFIT-SHARING
1. In accordance with Article 15, paragraphs 3 and 7 of the Convention, benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources as well as subsequent applications and commercialization shall be shared in a fair and equitable way with the Party providing such resources that is the country of origin of such resources or a Party that has acquired the genetic resources in accordance with the Convention. Such sharing shall be upon mutually agreed terms.
2. Each Party shall take legislative, administrative or policy measures, as appropriate, with the aim of ensuring that benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources that are held by indigenous and local communities, in accordance with domestic legislation regarding the established rights of these indigenous and local communities over these genetic resources, are shared in a fair and equitable way with the communities concerned, based on mutually agreed terms.
3. To implement paragraph 1 above, each Party shall take legislative, administrative or policy measures, as appropriate.
4. Benefits may include monetary and non-monetary benefits, including but not limited to those listed in the Annex.
5. Each Party shall take legislative, administrative or policy measures, as appropriate, in order that the benefits arising from the utilization of traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources are shared in a fair and equitable way with indigenous and local communities holding such knowledge. Such sharing shall be upon mutually agreed terms.

ACCESS TO GENETIC RESOURCES
1. In the exercise of sovereign rights over natural resources, and subject to domestic access and benefit-sharing legislation or regulatory requirements, access to genetic resources for their utilization shall be subject to the prior informed consent of the Party providing such resources that is the country of origin of such resources or a Party that has acquired the genetic resources in accordance with the Convention, unless otherwise determined by that Party.
2. In accordance with domestic law, each Party shall take measures, as appropriate, with the aim of ensuring that the prior informed consent or approval and involvement of indigenous and local communities is obtained for access to

TRANSBOUNDARY COOPERATION
1. In instances where the same genetic resources are found in situ within the territory of more than one Party, those Parties shall endeavour to cooperate, as appropriate, with the involvement of indigenous and local communities concerned, where applicable, with a view to implementing this Protocol.
2. Where the same traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources is shared by one or more indigenous and local communities in several Parties, those Parties shall endeavour to cooperate, as appropriate, with the involvement of the indigenous and local communities concerned, with a view to implementing the objective of this Protocol.

TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE ASSOCIATED WITH
GENETIC RESOURCES
1. In implementing their obligations under this Protocol, Parties shall in accordance with domestic law take into consideration indigenous and local communities’ customary laws, community protocols and procedures, as applicable, with respect to traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources.
2. Parties, with the effective participation of the indigenous and local communities concerned, shall establish mechanisms to inform potential users of traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources about their obligations, including measures as made available through the Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-House for access to and fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of such knowledge.
3. Parties shall endeavour to support, as appropriate, the development by indigenous and local communities, including women within these communities, of:
(a) Community protocols in relation to access to traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the utilization of such knowledge;
(b) Minimum requirements for mutually agreed terms to secure the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources; and (c) Model contractual clauses for benefit-sharing arising from the utilization of traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources.

SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS In the development and implementation of its access and benefit-sharing legislation or regulatory requirements, each Party shall:
(a) Create conditions to promote and encourage research which contributes to the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, particularly in developing countries, including through simplified measures on access for non-commercial research purposes, taking into account the need to address a change of intent for such research;
(b) Pay due regard to cases of present or imminent emergencies that threaten or damage human, animal or plant health, as determined nationally or internationally. Parties may take into consideration the need for expeditious access to genetic resources and expeditious fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the use of such genetic resources, including access to affordable treatments by those in need, especially in developing countries;
(c) Consider the importance of genetic resources for food and agriculture and their special role for food security.

CONTRIBUTION TO CONSERVATION AND SUSTAINABLE USE The Parties shall encourage users and providers to direct benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources towards the conservation of biological diversity and the sustainable use of its components.

GLOBAL MULTILATERAL BENEFIT-SHARING MECHANISM Parties shall consider the need for and modalities of a global multilateral benefitsharing mechanism to address the fair and equitable sharing of benefits derived from the utilization of genetic resources and traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources that occur in transboundary situations or for which it is not possible to grant or obtain prior informed consent. The benefits shared by users of genetic resources and traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources through this mechanism shall be used to support the conservation of biological diversity and the sustainable use of its components globally.

forthwith notify the Secretariat of any changes in the designation of its national focal point or in the contact information or responsibilities of its competent national authority or authorities.
5. The Secretariat shall make information received pursuant to paragraph 4 above available through the Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-House.

THE ACCESS AND BENEFIT-SHARING CLEARING-HOUSE AND INFORMATION-SHARING
1. An Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-House is hereby established as part of the clearing-house mechanism under Article 18, paragraph 3, of the Convention.
It shall serve as a means for sharing of information related to access and benefitsharing. In particular, it shall provide access to information made available by each Party relevant to the implementation of this Protocol.
2. Without prejudice to the protection of confidential information, each Party shall make available to the Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-House any information required by this Protocol, as well as information required pursuant to the decisions taken by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol. The information shall include:
(a) Legislative, administrative and policy measures on access and benefit-sharing;
(b) Information on the national focal point and competent national authority or authorities; and (c) Permits or their equivalent issued at the time of access as evidence of the decision to grant prior informed consent and of the establishment of mutually agreed terms.
3. Additional information, if available and as appropriate, may include:
(a) Relevant competent authorities of indigenous and local communities, and information as so decided;
(b) Model contractual clauses;
(c) Methods and tools developed to monitor genetic resources; and (d) Codes of conduct and best practices.
4. The modalities of the operation of the Access and Benefit-sharing ClearingHouse, including reports on its activities, shall be considered and decided upon by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol at its first meeting, and kept under review thereafter.
4. Parties, in their implementation of this Protocol, shall, as far as possible, not restrict the customary use and exchange of genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge within and amongst indigenous and local communities in accordance with the objectives of the Convention.

NATIONAL FOCAL POINTS AND COMPETENT
NATIONAL AUTHORITIES
1. Each Party shall designate a national focal point on access and benefit-sharing.
The national focal point shall make information available as follows:
(a) For applicants seeking access to genetic resources, information on procedures for obtaining prior informed consent and establishing mutually agreed terms, including benefit-sharing;
(b) For applicants seeking access to traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources, where possible, information on procedures for obtaining prior informed consent or approval and involvement, as appropriate, of indigenous and local communities and establishing mutually agreed terms including benefit-sharing; and (c) Information on competent national authorities, relevant indigenous and local communities and relevant stakeholders.
The national focal point shall be responsible for liaison with the Secretariat.
2. Each Party shall designate one or more competent national authorities on access and benefit-sharing. Competent national authorities shall, in accordance with applicable national legislative, administrative or policy measures, be responsible for granting access or, as applicable, issuing written evidence that access requirements have been met and be responsible for advising on applicable procedures and requirements for obtaining prior informed consent and entering into mutually agreed terms.
3. A Party may designate a single entity to fulfil the functions of both focal point and competent national authority.
4. Each Party shall, no later than the date of entry into force of this Protocol for it, notify the Secretariat of the contact information of its national focal point and its competent national authority or authorities. Where a Party designates more than one competent national authority, it shall convey to the Secretariat, with its notification thereof, relevant information on the respective responsibilities of those authorities. Where applicable, such information shall, at a minimum, specify which competent authority is responsible for the genetic resources sought. Each Party shall

MONITORING THE UTILIZATION OF GENETIC RESOURCES
1. To support compliance, each Party shall take measures, as appropriate, to monitor and to enhance transparency about the utilization of genetic resources. Such measures shall include:
(a) The designation of one or more checkpoints, as follows:
(i) Designated checkpoints would collect or receive, as appropriate, relevant information related to prior informed consent, to the source of the genetic resource, to the establishment of mutually agreed terms, and/or to the utilization of genetic resources, as appropriate;
(ii) Each Party shall, as appropriate and depending on the particular characteristics of a designated checkpoint, require users of genetic resources to provide the information specified in the above paragraph at a designated checkpoint. Each Party shall take appropriate, effective and proportionate measures to address situations of non-compliance;
(iii) Such information, including from internationally recognized certificates of compliance where they are available, will, without prejudice to the protection of confidential information, be provided to relevant national authorities, to the Party providing prior informed consent and to the Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-House, as appropriate;
(iv) Checkpoints must be effective and should have functions relevant to implementation of this subparagraph (a). They should be relevant to the utilization of genetic resources, or to the collection of relevant information at, inter alia, any stage of research, development, innovation, pre‐commercialization or commercialization.
(b) Encouraging users and providers of genetic resources to include provisions in mutually agreed terms to share information on the implementation of such terms, including through reporting requirements; and (c) Encouraging the use of cost-effective communication tools and systems.
2. A permit or its equivalent issued in accordance with Article 6, paragraph 3 (e) and made available to the Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-House, shall constitute an internationally recognized certificate of compliance.
3. An internationally recognized certificate of compliance shall serve as evidence that the genetic resource which it covers has been accessed in accordance with prior informed consent and that mutually agreed terms have been established, as required

COMPLIANCE WITH DOMESTIC LEGISLATION OR REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS ON ACCESS AND BENEFIT-SHARING
1. Each Party shall take appropriate, effective and proportionate legislative, administrative or policy measures to provide that genetic resources utilized within its jurisdiction have been accessed in accordance with prior informed consent and that mutually agreed terms have been established, as required by the domestic access and benefit-sharing legislation or regulatory requirements of the other Party.
2. Parties shall take appropriate, effective and proportionate measures to address situations of non-compliance with measures adopted in accordance with paragraph 1 above.
3. Parties shall, as far as possible and as appropriate, cooperate in cases of alleged violation of domestic access and benefit-sharing legislation or regulatory requirements referred to in paragraph 1 above.

COMPLIANCE WITH DOMESTIC LEGISLATION OR
REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS ON ACCESS AND BENEFITSHARING FOR TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE
ASSOCIATED WITH GENETIC RESOURCES
1. Each Party shall take appropriate, effective and proportionate legislative, administrative or policy measures, as appropriate, to provide that traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources utilized within their jurisdiction has been accessed in accordance with prior informed consent or approval and involvement of indigenous and local communities and that mutually agreed terms have been established, as required by domestic access and benefit-sharing legislation or regulatory requirements of the other Party where such indigenous and local communities are located.
2. Each Party shall take appropriate, effective and proportionate measures to address situations of non-compliance with measures adopted in accordance with paragraph 1 above.
3. Parties shall, as far as possible and as appropriate, cooperate in cases of alleged violation of domestic access and benefit-sharing legislation or regulatory requirements referred to in paragraph 1 above.

MODEL CONTRACTUAL CLAUSES
1. Each Party shall encourage, as appropriate, the development, update and use of sectoral and cross-sectoral model contractual clauses for mutually agreed terms.
2. The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol shall periodically take stock of the use of sectoral and cross-sectoral model contractual clauses.

CODES OF CONDUCT, GUIDELINES AND BEST PRACTICES AND/OR STANDARDS
1. Each Party shall encourage, as appropriate, the development, update and use of voluntary codes of conduct, guidelines and best practices and/or standards in relation to access and benefit-sharing.
2. The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol shall periodically take stock of the use of voluntary codes of conduct, guidelines and best practices and/or standards and consider the adoption of specific codes of conduct, guidelines and best practices and/or standards.

AWARENESS-RAISING Each Party shall take measures to raise awareness of the importance of genetic resources and traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources, and related access and benefit-sharing issues. Such measures may include, inter alia:
(a) Promotion of this Protocol, including its objective;
(b) Organization of meetings of indigenous and local communities and relevant stakeholders;
(c) Establishment and maintenance of a help desk for indigenous and local communities and relevant stakeholders;
(d) Information dissemination through a national clearing-house;
by the domestic access and benefit-sharing legislation or regulatory requirements of the Party providing prior informed consent.
4. The internationally recognized certificate of compliance shall contain the following minimum information when it is not confidential:
(a) Issuing authority;
(b) Date of issuance;
(c) The provider;
(d) Unique identifier of the certificate;
(e) The person or entity to whom prior informed consent was granted;
(f) Subject-matter or genetic resources covered by the certificate;
(g) Confirmation that mutually agreed terms were established;
(h) Confirmation that prior informed consent was obtained; and (i) Commercial and/or non-commercial use.

COMPLIANCE WITH MUTUALLY AGREED TERMS
1. In the implementation of Article 6, paragraph 3 (g) (i) and Article 7, each Party shall encourage providers and users of genetic resources and/or traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources to include provisions in mutually agreed terms to cover, where appropriate, dispute resolution including:
(a) The jurisdiction to which they will subject any dispute resolution processes;
(b) The applicable law; and/or (c) Options for alternative dispute resolution, such as mediation or arbitration.
2. Each Party shall ensure that an opportunity to seek recourse is available under their legal systems, consistent with applicable jurisdictional requirements, in cases of disputes arising from mutually agreed terms.
3. Each Party shall take effective measures, as appropriate, regarding:
(a) Access to justice; and (b) The utilization of mechanisms regarding mutual recognition and enforcement of foreign judgments and arbitral awards.
4. The effectiveness of this article shall be reviewed by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol in accordance with Article 31 of this Protocol.

4. In support of the implementation of this Protocol, capacity-building and development may address, inter alia, the following key areas:
(a) Capacity to implement, and to comply with the obligations of, this Protocol;
(b) Capacity to negotiate mutually agreed terms;
(c) Capacity to develop, implement and enforce domestic legislative, administrative or policy measures on access and benefit-sharing; and (d) Capacity of countries to develop their endogenous research capabilities to add value to their own genetic resources.
5. Measures in accordance with paragraphs 1 to 4 above may include, inter alia:
(a) Legal and institutional development;
(b) Promotion of equity and fairness in negotiations, such as training to negotiate mutually agreed terms;
(c) The monitoring and enforcement of compliance;
(d) Employment of best available communication tools and Internet-based systems for access and benefit-sharing activities;
(e) Development and use of valuation methods;
(f) Bioprospecting, associated research and taxonomic studies;
(g) Technology transfer, and infrastructure and technical capacity to make such technology transfer sustainable;
(h) Enhancement of the contribution of access and benefit-sharing activities to the conservation of biological diversity and the sustainable use of its components;
(i) Special measures to increase the capacity of relevant stakeholders in relation to access and benefit-sharing; and (j) Special measures to increase the capacity of indigenous and local communities with emphasis on enhancing the capacity of women within those communities in relation to access to genetic resources and/or traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources.
6. Information on capacity-building and development initiatives at national, regional and international levels, undertaken in accordance with paragraphs 1 to 5 above, should be provided to the Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-House with a view to promoting synergy and coordination on capacity-building and development for access and benefit-sharing.
(e) Promotion of voluntary codes of conduct, guidelines and best practices and/or standards in consultation with indigenous and local communities and relevant stakeholders;
(f) Promotion of, as appropriate, domestic, regional and international exchanges of experience;
(g) Education and training of users and providers of genetic resources and traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources about their access and benefit-sharing obligations;
(h) Involvement of indigenous and local communities and relevant stakeholders in the implementation of this Protocol; and (i) Awareness-raising of community protocols and procedures of indigenous and local communities.

CAPACITY
1. The Parties shall cooperate in the capacity-building, capacity development and strengthening of human resources and institutional capacities to effectively implement this Protocol in developing country Parties, in particular the least developed countries and small island developing States among them, and Parties with economies in transition, including through existing global, regional, subregional and national institutions and organizations. In this context, Parties should facilitate the involvement of indigenous and local communities and relevant stakeholders, including non-governmental organizations and the private sector.
2. The need of developing country Parties, in particular the least developed countries and small island developing States among them, and Parties with economies in transition for financial resources in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Convention shall be taken fully into account for capacity-building and development to implement this Protocol.
3. As a basis for appropriate measures in relation to the implementation of this Protocol, developing country Parties, in particular the least developed countries and small island developing States among them, and Parties with economies in transition should identify their national capacity needs and priorities through national capacity self-assessments. In doing so, such Parties should support the capacity needs and priorities of indigenous and local communities and relevant stakeholders, as identified by them, emphasizing the capacity needs and priorities of women.

with economies in transition, for financial resources, as well as the capacity needs and priorities of indigenous and local communities, including women within these communities.
4. In the context of paragraph 1 above, the Parties shall also take into account the needs of the developing country Parties, in particular the least developed countries and small island developing States among them, and of the Parties with economies in transition, in their efforts to identify and implement their capacity-building and development requirements for the purposes of the implementation of this Protocol.
5. The guidance to the financial mechanism of the Convention in relevant decisions of the Conference of the Parties, including those agreed before the adoption of this Protocol, shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to the provisions of this Article.
6. The developed country Parties may also provide, and the developing country Parties and the Parties with economies in transition avail themselves of, financial and other resources for the implementation of the provisions of this Protocol through bilateral, regional and multilateral channels.

CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES SERVING AS THE
MEETING OF THE PARTIES TO THIS PROTOCOL
1. The Conference of the Parties shall serve as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol.
2. Parties to the Convention that are not Parties to this Protocol may participate as observers in the proceedings of any meeting of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol. When the Conference of the Parties serves as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol, decisions under this Protocol shall be taken only by those that are Parties to it.
3. When the Conference of the Parties serves as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol, any member of the Bureau of the Conference of the Parties representing a Party to the Convention but, at that time, not a Party to this Protocol, shall be substituted by a member to be elected by and from among the Parties to this Protocol.
4. The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol shall keep under regular review the implementation of this Protocol and shall make, within its mandate, the decisions necessary to promote its effective implementation. It shall perform the functions assigned to it by this Protocol and shall:

TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER, COLLABORATION AND COOPERATION In accordance with Articles 15, 16, 18 and 19 of the Convention, the Parties shall collaborate and cooperate in technical and scientific research and development programmes, including biotechnological research activities, as a means to achieve the objective of this Protocol. The Parties undertake to promote and encourage access to technology by, and transfer of technology to, developing country Parties, in particular the least developed countries and small island developing States among them, and Parties with economies in transition, in order to enable the development and strengthening of a sound and viable technological and scientific base for the attainment of the objectives of the Convention and this Protocol. Where possible and appropriate such collaborative activities shall take place in and with a Party or the Parties providing genetic resources that is the country or are the countries of origin of such resources or a Party or Parties that have acquired the genetic resources in accordance with the Convention.

NON-PARTIES The Parties shall encourage non-Parties to adhere to this Protocol and to contribute appropriate information to the Access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-House.

FINANCIAL MECHANISM AND RESOURCES
1. In considering financial resources for the implementation of this Protocol, the Parties shall take into account the provisions of Article 20 of the Convention.
2. The financial mechanism of the Convention shall be the financial mechanism for this Protocol.
3. Regarding the capacity-building and development referred to in Article 22 of this Protocol, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol, in providing guidance with respect to the financial mechanism referred to in paragraph 2 above, for consideration by the Conference of the Parties, shall take into account the need of developing country Parties, in particular the least developed countries and small island developing States among them, and of Parties

of its wish to be represented at a meeting of the Conference of the Parties serving as a meeting of the Parties to this Protocol as an observer, may be so admitted, unless at least one third of the Parties present object. Except as otherwise provided in this Article, the admission and participation of observers shall be subject to the rules of procedure, as referred to in paragraph 5 above.

SUBSIDIARY BODIES
1. Any subsidiary body established by or under the Convention may serve this Protocol, including upon a decision of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol. Any such decision shall specify the tasks to be undertaken.
2. Parties to the Convention that are not Parties to this Protocol may participate as observers in the proceedings of any meeting of any such subsidiary bodies. When a subsidiary body of the Convention serves as a subsidiary body to this Protocol, decisions under this Protocol shall be taken only by Parties to this Protocol.
3. When a subsidiary body of the Convention exercises its functions with regard to matters concerning this Protocol, any member of the bureau of that subsidiary body representing a Party to the Convention but, at that time, not a Party to this Protocol, shall be substituted by a member to be elected by and from among the Parties to this Protocol.

SECRETARIAT
1. The Secretariat established by Article 24 of the Convention shall serve as the secretariat to this Protocol.
2. Article 24, paragraph 1, of the Convention on the functions of the Secretariat shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to this Protocol.
3. To the extent that they are distinct, the costs of the secretariat services for this Protocol shall be met by the Parties hereto. The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol shall, at its first meeting, decide on the necessary budgetary arrangements to this end.
(a) Make recommendations on any matters necessary for the implementation of this Protocol;
(b) Establish such subsidiary bodies as are deemed necessary for the implementation of this Protocol;
(c) Seek and utilize, where appropriate, the services and cooperation of, and information provided by, competent international organizations and intergovernmental and non-governmental bodies;
(d) Establish the form and the intervals for transmitting the information to be submitted in accordance with Article 29 of this Protocol and consider such information as well as reports submitted by any subsidiary body;
(e) Consider and adopt, as required, amendments to this Protocol and its Annex, as well as any additional annexes to this Protocol, that are deemed necessary for the implementation of this Protocol; and (f) Exercise such other functions as may be required for the implementation of this Protocol.
5. The rules of procedure of the Conference of the Parties and financial rules of the Convention shall be applied, mutatis mutandis, under this Protocol, except as may be otherwise decided by consensus by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol.
6. The first meeting of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol shall be convened by the Secretariat and held concurrently with the first meeting of the Conference of the Parties that is scheduled after the date of the entry into force of this Protocol. Subsequent ordinary meetings of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol shall be held concurrently with ordinary meetings of the Conference of the Parties, unless otherwise decided by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol.
7. Extraordinary meetings of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol shall be held at such other times as may be deemed necessary by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol, or at the written request of any Party, provided that, within six months of the request being communicated to the Parties by the Secretariat, it is supported by at least one third of the Parties.
8. The United Nations, its specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency, as well as any State member thereof or observers thereto not party to the Convention, may be represented as observers at meetings of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol. Any body or agency, whether national or international, governmental or non-governmental, that is qualified in matters covered by this Protocol and that has informed the Secretariat

ENTRY INTO FORCE
1. This Protocol shall enter into force on the ninetieth day after the date of deposit of the fiftieth instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession by States or regional economic integration organizations that are Parties to the Convention.
2. This Protocol shall enter into force for a State or regional economic integration organization that ratifies, accepts or approves this Protocol or accedes thereto after the deposit of the fiftieth instrument as referred to in paragraph 1 above, on the ninetieth day after the date on which that State or regional economic integration organization deposits its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, or on the date on which the Convention enters into force for that State or regional economic integration organization, whichever shall be the later.
3. For the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2 above, any instrument deposited by a regional economic integration organization shall not be counted as additional to those deposited by member States of such organization.

RESERVATIONS No reservations may be made to this Protocol.

WITHDRAWAL
1. At any time after two years from the date on which this Protocol has entered into force for a Party, that Party may withdraw from this Protocol by giving written notification to the Depositary.
2. Any such withdrawal shall take place upon expiry of one year after the date of its receipt by the Depositary, or on such later date as may be specified in the notification of the withdrawal.

MONITORING AND REPORTING Each Party shall monitor the implementation of its obligations under this Protocol, and shall, at intervals and in the format to be determined by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol, report to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol on measures that it has taken to implement this Protocol.

PROCEDURES AND MECHANISMS TO PROMOTE COMPLIANCE WITH THIS PROTOCOL The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol shall, at its first meeting, consider and approve cooperative procedures and institutional mechanisms to promote compliance with the provisions of this Protocol and to address cases of non-compliance. These procedures and mechanisms shall include provisions to offer advice or assistance, where appropriate. They shall be separate from, and without prejudice to, the dispute settlement procedures and mechanisms under Article 27 of the Convention.

ASSESSMENT AND REVIEW The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol shall undertake, four years after the entry into force of this Protocol and thereafter at intervals determined by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Protocol, an evaluation of the effectiveness of this Protocol.

SIGNATURE This Protocol shall be open for signature by Parties to the Convention at the United Nations Headquarters in New York, from 2 February 2011 to 1 February 2012.

(c) Participation in product development;
(d) Collaboration, cooperation and contribution in education and training;
(e) Admittance to ex situ facilities of genetic resources and to databases;
(f) Transfer to the provider of the genetic resources of knowledge and technology under fair and most favourable terms, including on concessional and preferential terms where agreed, in particular, knowledge and technology that make use of genetic resources, including biotechnology, or that are relevant to the conservation and sustainable utilization of biological diversity;
(g) Strengthening capacities for technology transfer;
(h) Institutional capacity-building;
(i) Human and material resources to strengthen the capacities for the administration and enforcement of access regulations;
(j) Training related to genetic resources with the full participation of countries providing genetic resources, and where possible, in such countries;
(k) Access to scientific information relevant to conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, including biological inventories and taxonomic studies;
(l) Contributions to the local economy;
(m) Research directed towards priority needs, such as health and food security, taking into account domestic uses of genetic resources in the Party providing genetic resources;
(n) Institutional and professional relationships that can arise from an access and benefit-sharing agreement and subsequent collaborative activities;
(o) Food and livelihood security benefits;
(p) Social recognition;
(q) Joint ownership of relevant intellectual property rights.

AUTHENTIC TEXTS The original of this Protocol, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized to that effect, have signed this Protocol on the dates indicated.
DONE at Nagoya on this twenty-ninth day of October, two thousand and ten.
Annex MONETARY AND NON-MONETARY BENEFITS
1. Monetary benefits may include, but not be limited to:
(a) Access fees/fee per sample collected or otherwise acquired;
(b) Up-front payments;
(c) Milestone payments;
(d) Payment of royalties;
(e) Licence fees in case of commercialization;
(f) Special fees to be paid to trust funds supporting conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity;
(g) Salaries and preferential terms where mutually agreed;
(h) Research funding;
(i) Joint ventures;
(j) Joint ownership of relevant intellectual property rights.
2. Non-monetary benefits may include, but not be limited to:
(a) Sharing of research and development results;
(b) Collaboration, cooperation and contribution in scientific research and development programmes, particularly biotechnological research activities, where possible in the Party providing genetic resources;


================================================================================
SOURCE: Convention on Biological Diversity.pdf
================================================================================

Convention on Biological Diversity Text and Annexes

Convention on Biological Diversity Text and Annexes Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity Montreal

Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity United Nations Environment Programme 413 St. Jacques Street West, Suite 800 Montreal, Quebec, Canada H2Y 1N9 Phone: +1 (514) 288 2220 Fax: +1 (514) 288 6588 E-mail: secretariat@cbd.int Website: www.cbd.int © 2011 by the Secretariat for the Convention on Biological Diversity All rights reserved. Published 2011 Printed in Canada The designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
This publication may be reproduced for educational or non-profit purposes without special permission from the copyright holders, provided acknowledgement of the source is made. The Secretariat of the Convention would appreciate receiving a copy of the publications that use this document as a source.
Local catalogue record:
Convention on Biological Diversity : text and annexes / Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity.
Summary: “This publication contains the text and annexes of the Convention on Biological Diversity, first adopted 22 May 1992.” — Provided by publisher.

1. Biodiversity conservation – Law and legislation 2. Biodiversity – International cooperation
3. Environmental protection – International cooperation I. Convention on Biological Diversity (1992). II. United Nations.
K3488. A35 C66 2011 For further information please contact the Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity

Introduction The Earth’s biological resources are vital to humanity’s economic and social development.
As a result, there is growing recognition that biological diversity is a global asset of tremendous value to present and future generations. At the same time, the threat to species and ecosystems has never been so great as it is today. Species extinction caused by human activities continues at an alarming rate.
In response, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) convened the Ad Hoc Working Group of Experts on Biological Diversity in November 1988 to explore the need for an international convention on biological diversity. Soon after, in May 1989, it established the Ad Hoc Working Group of Technical and Legal Experts to prepare an international legal instrument for the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity. The experts were to take into account “the need to share costs and benefits between developed and developing countries” as well as “ways and means to support innovation by local people.” By February 1991, the Ad Hoc Working Group had become known as the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee. Its work culminated on 22 May 1992 with the Nairobi Conference for the Adoption of the Agreed Text of the Convention on Biological Diversity.
The Convention was opened for signature on 5 June 1992 at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (the Rio “Earth Summit”). It remained open for signature until 4 June 1993, by which time it had received 168 signatures. The Convention entered into force on 29 December 1993, which was 90 days after the 30th ratification. The first session of the Conference of the Parties was scheduled for 28 November - 9 December 1994 in the Bahamas.
The Convention on Biological Diversity was inspired by the world community’s growing commitment to sustainable development. It represents a dramatic step forward in the conservation of biological diversity, the sustainable use of its components, and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the use of genetic resources.

Preamble The Contracting Parties, Conscious of the intrinsic value of biological diversity and of the ecological, genetic, social, economic, scientific, educational, cultural, recreational and aesthetic values of biological diversity and its components, Conscious also of the importance of biological diversity for evolution and for maintaining life sustaining systems of the biosphere, Affirming that the conservation of biological diversity is a common concern of humankind, Reaffirming that States have sovereign rights over their own biological resources, Reaffirming also that States are responsible for conserving their biological diversity and for using their biological resources in a sustainable manner, Concerned that biological diversity is being significantly reduced by certain human activities, Aware of the general lack of information and knowledge regarding biological diversity and of the urgent need to develop scientific, technical and institutional capacities to provide the basic understanding upon which to plan and implement appropriate measures, Noting that it is vital to anticipate, prevent and attack the causes of significant reduction or loss of biological diversity at source, Noting also that where there is a threat of significant reduction or loss of biological diversity, lack of full scientific certainty should not be used as a reason for postponing measures to avoid or minimize such a threat, Noting further that the fundamental requirement for the conservation of biological diversity is the in-situ conservation of ecosystems and natural habitats and the maintenance and recovery of viable populations of species in their natural surroundings, Noting further that ex-situ measures, preferably in the country of origin, also have an important role to play, Recognizing the close and traditional dependence of many indigenous and local communities embodying traditional lifestyles on biological resources, and the desirability of sharing equitably benefits arising from the use of traditional knowledge, innovations and practices relevant to the conservation of biological diversity and the sustainable use of its components,

Recognizing also the vital role that women play in the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity and affirming the need for the full participation of women at all levels of policy-making and implementation for biological diversity conservation, Stressing the importance of, and the need to promote, international, regional and global cooperation among States and intergovernmental organizations and the nongovernmental sector for the conservation of biological diversity and the sustainable use of its components, Acknowledging that the provision of new and additional financial resources and appropriate access to relevant technologies can be expected to make a substantial difference in the world’s ability to address the loss of biological diversity, Acknowledging further that special provision is required to meet the needs of developing countries, including the provision of new and additional financial resources and appropriate access to relevant technologies, Noting in this regard the special conditions of the least developed countries and small island States, Acknowledging that substantial investments are required to conserve biological diversity and that there is the expectation of a broad range of environmental, economic and social benefits from those investments, Recognizing that economic and social development and poverty eradication are the first and overriding priorities of developing countries, Aware that conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity is of critical importance for meeting the food, health and other needs of the growing world population, for which purpose access to and sharing of both genetic resources and technologies are essential, Noting that, ultimately, the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity will strengthen friendly relations among States and contribute to peace for humankind, Desiring to enhance and complement existing international arrangements for the conservation of biological diversity and sustainable use of its components, and Determined to conserve and sustainably use biological diversity for the benefit of present and future generations, Have agreed as follows:

Objectives The objectives of this Convention, to be pursued in accordance with its relevant provisions, are the conservation of biological diversity, the sustainable use of its components and the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic resources, including by appropriate access to genetic resources and by appropriate transfer of relevant technologies, taking into account all rights over those resources and to technologies, and by appropriate funding.

Use of Terms For the purposes of this Convention:
“Biological diversity” means the variability among living organisms from all sources including, inter alia, terrestrial, marine and other aquatic ecosystems and the ecological complexes of which they are part; this includes diversity within species, between species and of ecosystems.
“Biological resources” includes genetic resources, organisms or parts thereof, populations, or any other biotic component of ecosystems with actual or potential use or value for humanity.
“Biotechnology” means any technological application that uses biological systems, living organisms, or derivatives thereof, to make or modify products or processes for specific use.
“Country of origin of genetic resources” means the country which possesses those genetic resources in in-situ conditions.
“Country providing genetic resources” means the country supplying genetic resources collected from in-situ sources, including populations of both wild and domesticated species, or taken from ex-situ sources, which may or may not have originated in that country.
“Domesticated or cultivated species” means species in which the evolutionary process has been influenced by humans to meet their needs.
“Ecosystem” means a dynamic complex of plant, animal and micro-organism communities and their non-living environment interacting as a functional unit.

“Ex-situ conservation” means the conservation of components of biological diversity outside their natural habitats.
“Genetic material” means any material of plant, animal, microbial or other origin containing functional units of heredity.
“Genetic resources” means genetic material of actual or potential value.
“Habitat” means the place or type of site where an organism or population naturally occurs.
“In-situ conditions” means conditions where genetic resources exist within ecosystems and natural habitats, and, in the case of domesticated or cultivated species, in the surroundings where they have developed their distinctive properties.
“In-situ conservation” means the conservation of ecosystems and natural habitats and the maintenance and recovery of viable populations of species in their natural surroundings and, in the case of domesticated or cultivated species, in the surroundings where they have developed their distinctive properties.
“Protected area” means a geographically defined area which is designated or regulated and managed to achieve specific conservation objectives.
“Regional economic integration organization” means an organization constituted by sovereign States of a given region, to which its member States have transferred competence in respect of matters governed by this Convention and which has been duly authorized, in accordance with its internal procedures, to sign, ratify, accept, approve or accede to it.
“Sustainable use” means the use of components of biological diversity in a way and at a rate that does not lead to the long-term decline of biological diversity, thereby maintaining its potential to meet the needs and aspirations of present and future generations.
“Technology” includes biotechnology.

Principle States have, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of international law, the sovereign right to exploit their own resources pursuant to their own environmental policies, and the responsibility to ensure that activities within their jurisdiction or control do not cause damage to the environment of other States or of areas beyond the limits of national jurisdiction.

Jurisdictional Scope Subject to the rights of other States, and except as otherwise expressly provided in this Convention, the provisions of this Convention apply, in relation to each Contracting Party:
(a) In the case of components of biological diversity, in areas within the limits of its national jurisdiction; and (b) In the case of processes and activities, regardless of where their effects occur, carried out under its jurisdiction or control, within the area of its national jurisdiction or beyond the limits of national jurisdiction.

Cooperation Each Contracting Party shall, as far as possible and as appropriate, cooperate with other Contracting Parties, directly or, where appropriate, through competent international organizations, in respect of areas beyond national jurisdiction and on other matters of mutual interest, for the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity.

General Measures for Conservation and Sustainable Use Each Contracting Party shall, in accordance with its particular conditions and capabilities:
(a) Develop national strategies, plans or programmes for the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity or adapt for this purpose existing strategies, plans or programmes which shall reflect, inter alia, the measures set out in this Convention relevant to the Contracting Party concerned; and (b) Integrate, as far as possible and as appropriate, the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity into relevant sectoral or cross-sectoral plans, programmes and policies.

Identification and Monitoring Each Contracting Party shall, as far as possible and as appropriate, in particular for the purposes of Articles 8 to 10:
(a) Identify components of biological diversity important for its conservation and sustainable use having regard to the indicative list of categories set down in Annex I;
(b) Monitor, through sampling and other techniques, the components of biological diversity identified pursuant to subparagraph (a) above, paying particular attention to those requiring urgent conservation measures and those which offer the greatest potential for sustainable use;
(c) Identify processes and categories of activities which have or are likely to have significant adverse impacts on the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, and monitor their effects through sampling and other techniques; and (d) Maintain and organize, by any mechanism data, derived from identification and monitoring activities pursuant to subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) above.

In-situ Conservation Each Contracting Party shall, as far as possible and as appropriate:
(a) Establish a system of protected areas or areas where special measures need to be taken to conserve biological diversity;
(b) Develop, where necessary, guidelines for the selection, establishment and management of protected areas or areas where special measures need to be taken to conserve biological diversity;
(c) Regulate or manage biological resources important for the conservation of biological diversity whether within or outside protected areas, with a view to ensuring their conservation and sustainable use;
(d) Promote the protection of ecosystems, natural habitats and the maintenance of viable populations of species in natural surroundings;
(e) Promote environmentally sound and sustainable development in areas adjacent to protected areas with a view to furthering protection of these areas;

(f) Rehabilitate and restore degraded ecosystems and promote the recovery of threatened species, inter alia, through the development and implementation of plans or other management strategies;
(g) Establish or maintain means to regulate, manage or control the risks associated with the use and release of living modified organisms resulting from biotechnology which are likely to have adverse environmental impacts that could affect the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, taking also into account the risks to human health;
(h) Prevent the introduction of, control or eradicate those alien species which threaten ecosystems, habitats or species;
(i) Endeavour to provide the conditions needed for compatibility between present uses and the conservation of biological diversity and the sustainable use of its components;
(j) Subject to its national legislation, respect, preserve and maintain knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous and local communities embodying traditional lifestyles relevant for the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity and promote their wider application with the approval and involvement of the holders of such knowledge, innovations and practices and encourage the equitable sharing of the benefits arising from the utilization of such knowledge, innovations and practices;
(k) Develop or maintain necessary legislation and/or other regulatory provisions for the protection of threatened species and populations;
(l) Where a significant adverse effect on biological diversity has been determined pursuant to Article 7, regulate or manage the relevant processes and categories of activities; and (m) Cooperate in providing financial and other support for in-situ conservation outlined in subparagraphs (a) to (l) above, particularly to developing countries.

Ex-situ Conservation Each Contracting Party shall, as far as possible and as appropriate, and predominantly for the purpose of complementing in-situ measures:
(a) Adopt measures for the ex-situ conservation of components of biological diversity, preferably in the country of origin of such components;

(b) Establish and maintain facilities for ex-situ conservation of and research on plants, animals and micro-organisms, preferably in the country of origin of genetic resources;
(c) Adopt measures for the recovery and rehabilitation of threatened species and for their reintroduction into their natural habitats under appropriate conditions;
(d) Regulate and manage collection of biological resources from natural habitats for exsitu conservation purposes so as not to threaten ecosystems and in-situ populations of species, except where special temporary ex-situ measures are required under subparagraph (c) above; and (e) Cooperate in providing financial and other support for ex-situ conservation outlined in subparagraphs (a) to (d) above and in the establishment and maintenance of exsitu conservation facilities in developing countries.

Sustainable Use of Components of Biological Diversity Each Contracting Party shall, as far as possible and as appropriate:
(a) Integrate consideration of the conservation and sustainable use of biological resources into national decision-making;
(b) Adopt measures relating to the use of biological resources to avoid or minimize adverse impacts on biological diversity;
(c) Protect and encourage customary use of biological resources in accordance with traditional cultural practices that are compatible with conservation or sustainable use requirements;
(d) Support local populations to develop and implement remedial action in degraded areas where biological diversity has been reduced; and (e) Encourage cooperation between its governmental authorities and its private sector in developing methods for sustainable use of biological resources.

Incentive Measures Each Contracting Party shall, as far as possible and as appropriate, adopt economically and socially sound measures that act as incentives for the conservation and sustainable use of components of biological diversity.

Research and Training The Contracting Parties, taking into account the special needs of developing countries, shall:
(a) Establish and maintain programmes for scientific and technical education and training in measures for the identification, conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity and its components and provide support for such education and training for the specific needs of developing countries;
(b) Promote and encourage research which contributes to the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, particularly in developing countries, inter alia, in accordance with decisions of the Conference of the Parties taken in consequence of recommendations of the Subsidiary Body on Scientific, Technical and Technological Advice; and (c) In keeping with the provisions of Articles 16, 18 and 20, promote and cooperate in the use of scientific advances in biological diversity research in developing methods for conservation and sustainable use of biological resources.

Public Education and Awareness The Contracting Parties shall:
(a) Promote and encourage understanding of the importance of, and the measures required for, the conservation of biological diversity, as well as its propagation through media, and the inclusion of these topics in educational programmes; and (b) Cooperate, as appropriate, with other States and international organizations in developing educational and public awareness programmes, with respect to conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity.

Impact Assessment and Minimizing Adverse Impacts
1. Each Contracting Party, as far as possible and as appropriate, shall:
(a) Introduce appropriate procedures requiring environmental impact assessment of its proposed projects that are likely to have significant adverse effects on biological diversity with a view to avoiding or minimizing such effects and, where appropriate, allow for public participation in such procedures;
(b) Introduce appropriate arrangements to ensure that the environmental consequences of its programmes and policies that are likely to have significant adverse impacts on biological diversity are duly taken into account;
(c) Promote, on the basis of reciprocity, notification, exchange of information and consultation on activities under their jurisdiction or control which are likely to significantly affect adversely the biological diversity of other States or areas beyond the limits of national jurisdiction, by encouraging the conclusion of bilateral, regional or multilateral arrangements, as appropriate;
(d) In the case of imminent or grave danger or damage, originating under its jurisdiction or control, to biological diversity within the area under jurisdiction of other States or in areas beyond the limits of national jurisdiction, notify immediately the potentially affected States of such danger or damage, as well as initiate action to prevent or minimize such danger or damage; and (e) Promote national arrangements for emergency responses to activities or events, whether caused naturally or otherwise, which present a grave and imminent danger to biological diversity and encourage international cooperation to supplement such national efforts and, where appropriate and agreed by the States or regional economic integration organizations concerned, to establish joint contingency plans.
2. The Conference of the Parties shall examine, on the basis of studies to be carried out, the issue of liability and redress, including restoration and compensation, for damage to biological diversity, except where such liability is a purely internal matter.

Access to Genetic Resources
1. Recognizing the sovereign rights of States over their natural resources, the authority to determine access to genetic resources rests with the national governments and is subject to national legislation.

2. Each Contracting Party shall endeavour to create conditions to facilitate access to genetic resources for environmentally sound uses by other Contracting Parties and not to impose restrictions that run counter to the objectives of this Convention.
3. For the purpose of this Convention, the genetic resources being provided by a Contracting Party, as referred to in this Article and Articles 16 and 19, are only those that are provided by Contracting Parties that are countries of origin of such resources or by the Parties that have acquired the genetic resources in accordance with this Convention.
4. Access, where granted, shall be on mutually agreed terms and subject to the provisions of this Article.
5. Access to genetic resources shall be subject to prior informed consent of the Contracting Party providing such resources, unless otherwise determined by that Party.
6. Each Contracting Party shall endeavour to develop and carry out scientific research based on genetic resources provided by other Contracting Parties with the full participation of, and where possible in, such Contracting Parties.
7. Each Contracting Party shall take legislative, administrative or policy measures, as appropriate, and in accordance with Articles 16 and 19 and, where necessary, through the financial mechanism established by Articles 20 and 21 with the aim of sharing in a fair and equitable way the results of research and development and the benefits arising from the commercial and other utilization of genetic resources with the Contracting Party providing such resources. Such sharing shall be upon mutually agreed terms.

Access to and Transfer of technology
1. Each Contracting Party, recognizing that technology includes biotechnology, and that both access to and transfer of technology among Contracting Parties are essential elements for the attainment of the objectives of this Convention, undertakes subject to the provisions of this Article to provide and/or facilitate access for and transfer to other Contracting Parties of technologies that are relevant to the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity or make use of genetic resources and do not cause significant damage to the environment.
2. Access to and transfer of technology referred to in paragraph 1 above to developing countries shall be provided and/or facilitated under fair and most favourable terms, including on concessional and preferential terms where mutually agreed, and, where necessary, in accordance with the financial mechanism established by Articles 20 and 21.
In the case of technology subject to patents and other intellectual property rights, such access and transfer shall be provided on terms which recognize and are consistent with the adequate and effective protection of intellectual property rights. The application of this paragraph shall be consistent with paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 below.

3. Each Contracting Party shall take legislative, administrative or policy measures, as appropriate, with the aim that Contracting Parties, in particular those that are developing countries, which provide genetic resources are provided access to and transfer of technology which makes use of those resources, on mutually agreed terms, including technology protected by patents and other intellectual property rights, where necessary, through the provisions of Articles 20 and 21 and in accordance with international law and consistent with paragraphs 4 and 5 below.
4. Each Contracting Party shall take legislative, administrative or policy measures, as appropriate, with the aim that the private sector facilitates access to, joint development and transfer of technology referred to in paragraph 1 above for the benefit of both governmental institutions and the private sector of developing countries and in this regard shall abide by the obligations included in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 above.
5. The Contracting Parties, recognizing that patents and other intellectual property rights may have an influence on the implementation of this Convention, shall cooperate in this regard subject to national legislation and international law in order to ensure that such rights are supportive of and do not run counter to its objectives.

Exchange of Information
1. The Contracting Parties shall facilitate the exchange of information, from all publicly available sources, relevant to the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, taking into account the special needs of developing countries.
2. Such exchange of information shall include exchange of results of technical, scientific and socio-economic research, as well as information on training and surveying programmes, specialized knowledge, indigenous and traditional knowledge as such and in combination with the technologies referred to in Article 16, paragraph 1. It shall also, where feasible, include repatriation of information.

Technical and Scientific Cooperation
1. The Contracting Parties shall promote international technical and scientific cooperation in the field of conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, where necessary, through the appropriate international and national institutions.
2. Each Contracting Party shall promote technical and scientific cooperation with other Contracting Parties, in particular developing countries, in implementing this Convention, inter alia, through the development and implementation of national policies.
In promoting such cooperation, special attention should be given to the development and

strengthening of national capabilities, by means of human resources development and institution building.
3. The Conference of the Parties, at its first meeting, shall determine how to establish a clearing-house mechanism to promote and facilitate technical and scientific cooperation.
4. The Contracting Parties shall, in accordance with national legislation and policies, encourage and develop methods of cooperation for the development and use of technologies, including indigenous and traditional technologies, in pursuance of the objectives of this Convention. For this purpose, the Contracting Parties shall also promote cooperation in the training of personnel and exchange of experts.
5. The Contracting Parties shall, subject to mutual agreement, promote the establishment of joint research programmes and joint ventures for the development of technologies relevant to the objectives of this Convention.

Handling of Biotechnology and Distribution of its Benefits
1. Each Contracting Party shall take legislative, administrative or policy measures, as appropriate, to provide for the effective participation in biotechnological research activities by those Contracting Parties, especially developing countries, which provide the genetic resources for such research, and where feasible in such Contracting Parties.
2. Each Contracting Party shall take all practicable measures to promote and advance priority access on a fair and equitable basis by Contracting Parties, especially developing countries, to the results and benefits arising from biotechnologies based upon genetic resources provided by those Contracting Parties. Such access shall be on mutually agreed terms.
3. The Parties shall consider the need for and modalities of a protocol setting out appropriate procedures, including, in particular, advance informed agreement, in the field of the safe transfer, handling and use of any living modified organism resulting from biotechnology that may have adverse effect on the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity.
4. Each Contracting Party shall, directly or by requiring any natural or legal person under its jurisdiction providing the organisms referred to in paragraph 3 above, provide any available information about the use and safety regulations required by that Contracting Party in handling such organisms, as well as any available information on the potential adverse impact of the specific organisms concerned to the Contracting Party into which those organisms are to be introduced.

Financial Resources
1. Each Contracting Party undertakes to provide, in accordance with its capabilities, financial support and incentives in respect of those national activities which are intended to achieve the objectives of this Convention, in accordance with its national plans, priorities and programmes.
2. The developed country Parties shall provide new and additional financial resources to enable developing country Parties to meet the agreed full incremental costs to them of implementing measures which fulfil the obligations of this Convention and to benefit from its provisions and which costs are agreed between a developing country Party and the institutional structure referred to in Article 21, in accordance with policy, strategy, programme priorities and eligibility criteria and an indicative list of incremental costs established by the Conference of the Parties. Other Parties, including countries undergoing the process of transition to a market economy, may voluntarily assume the obligations of the developed country Parties. For the purpose of this Article, the Conference of the Parties, shall at its first meeting establish a list of developed country Parties and other Parties which voluntarily assume the obligations of the developed country Parties. The Conference of the Parties shall periodically review and if necessary amend the list. Contributions from other countries and sources on a voluntary basis would also be encouraged. The implementation of these commitments shall take into account the need for adequacy, predictability and timely flow of funds and the importance of burden-sharing among the contributing Parties included in the list.
3. The developed country Parties may also provide, and developing country Parties avail themselves of, financial resources related to the implementation of this Convention through bilateral, regional and other multilateral channels.
4. The extent to which developing country Parties will effectively implement their commitments under this Convention will depend on the effective implementation by developed country Parties of their commitments under this Convention related to financial resources and transfer of technology and will take fully into account the fact that economic and social development and eradication of poverty are the first and overriding priorities of the developing country Parties.
5. The Parties shall take full account of the specific needs and special situation of least developed countries in their actions with regard to funding and transfer of technology.
6. The Contracting Parties shall also take into consideration the special conditions resulting from the dependence on, distribution and location of, biological diversity within developing country Parties, in particular small island States.

7. Consideration shall also be given to the special situation of developing countries, including those that are most environmentally vulnerable, such as those with arid and semi- arid zones, coastal and mountainous areas.

Financial Mechanism
1. There shall be a mechanism for the provision of financial resources to developing country Parties for purposes of this Convention on a grant or concessional basis the essential elements of which are described in this Article. The mechanism shall function under the authority and guidance of, and be accountable to, the Conference of the Parties for purposes of this Convention. The operations of the mechanism shall be carried out by such institutional structure as may be decided upon by the Conference of the Parties at its first meeting. For purposes of this Convention, the Conference of the Parties shall determine the policy, strategy, programme priorities and eligibility criteria relating to the access to and utilization of such resources. The contributions shall be such as to take into account the need for predictability, adequacy and timely flow of funds referred to in Article 20 in accordance with the amount of resources needed to be decided periodically by the Conference of the Parties and the importance of burden-sharing among the contributing Parties included in the list referred to in Article 20, paragraph 2. Voluntary contributions may also be made by the developed country Parties and by other countries and sources. The mechanism shall operate within a democratic and transparent system of governance.
2. Pursuant to the objectives of this Convention, the Conference of the Parties shall at its first meeting determine the policy, strategy and programme priorities, as well as detailed criteria and guidelines for eligibility for access to and utilization of the financial resources including monitoring and evaluation on a regular basis of such utilization. The Conference of the Parties shall decide on the arrangements to give effect to paragraph 1 above after consultation with the institutional structure entrusted with the operation of the financial mechanism.
3. The Conference of the Parties shall review the effectiveness of the mechanism established under this Article, including the criteria and guidelines referred to in paragraph 2 above, not less than two years after the entry into force of this Convention and thereafter on a regular basis. Based on such review, it shall take appropriate action to improve the effectiveness of the mechanism if necessary.
4. The Contracting Parties shall consider strengthening existing financial institutions to provide financial resources for the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity.

Relationship with Other International Conventions
1. The provisions of this Convention shall not affect the rights and obligations of any Contracting Party deriving from any existing international agreement, except where the exercise of those rights and obligations would cause a serious damage or threat to biological diversity.
2. Contracting Parties shall implement this Convention with respect to the marine environment consistently with the rights and obligations of States under the law of the sea.

Conference of the Parties
1. A Conference of the Parties is hereby established. The first meeting of the Conference of the Parties shall be convened by the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme not later than one year after the entry into force of this Convention. Thereafter, ordinary meetings of the Conference of the Parties shall be held at regular intervals to be determined by the Conference at its first meeting.
2. Extraordinary meetings of the Conference of the Parties shall be held at such other times as may be deemed necessary by the Conference, or at the written request of any Party, provided that, within six months of the request being communicated to them by the Secretariat, it is supported by at least one third of the Parties.
3. The Conference of the Parties shall by consensus agree upon and adopt rules of procedure for itself and for any subsidiary body it may establish, as well as financial rules governing the funding of the Secretariat. At each ordinary meeting, it shall adopt a budget for the financial period until the next ordinary meeting.
4. The Conference of the Parties shall keep under review the implementation of this Convention, and, for this purpose, shall:
(a) Establish the form and the intervals for transmitting the information to be submitted in accordance with Article 26 and consider such information as well as reports submitted by any subsidiary body;
(b) Review scientific, technical and technological advice on biological diversity provided in accordance with Article 25;
(c) Consider and adopt, as required, protocols in accordance with Article 28;

(d) Consider and adopt, as required, in accordance with Articles 29 and 30, amendments to this Convention and its annexes;
(e) Consider amendments to any protocol, as well as to any annexes thereto, and, if so decided, recommend their adoption to the parties to the protocol concerned;
(f) Consider and adopt, as required, in accordance with Article 30, additional annexes to this Convention;
(g) Establish such subsidiary bodies, particularly to provide scientific and technical advice, as are deemed necessary for the implementation of this Convention;
(h) Contact, through the Secretariat, the executive bodies of conventions dealing with matters covered by this Convention with a view to establishing appropriate forms of cooperation with them; and (i) Consider and undertake any additional action that may be required for the achievement of the purposes of this Convention in the light of experience gained in its operation.
5. The United Nations, its specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency, as well as any State not Party to this Convention, may be represented as observers at meetings of the Conference of the Parties. Any other body or agency, whether governmental or non-governmental, qualified in fields relating to conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, which has informed the Secretariat of its wish to be represented as an observer at a meeting of the Conference of the Parties, may be admitted unless at least one third of the Parties present object. The admission and participation of observers shall be subject to the rules of procedure adopted by the Conference of the Parties.

Secretariat
1. A secretariat is hereby established. Its functions shall be:
(a) To arrange for and service meetings of the Conference of the Parties provided for in Article 23;
(b) To perform the functions assigned to it by any protocol;
(c) To prepare reports on the execution of its functions under this Convention and present them to the Conference of the Parties;

(d) To coordinate with other relevant international bodies and, in particular to enter into such administrative and contractual arrangements as may be required for the effective discharge of its functions; and (e) To perform such other functions as may be determined by the Conference of the Parties.
2. At its first ordinary meeting, the Conference of the Parties shall designate the secretariat from amongst those existing competent international organizations which have signified their willingness to carry out the secretariat functions under this Convention.

Subsidiary Body on Scientific, Technical and Technological Advice
1. A subsidiary body for the provision of scientific, technical and technological advice is hereby established to provide the Conference of the Parties and, as appropriate, its other subsidiary bodies with timely advice relating to the implementation of this Convention.
This body shall be open to participation by all Parties and shall be multidisciplinary. It shall comprise government representatives competent in the relevant field of expertise. It shall report regularly to the Conference of the Parties on all aspects of its work.
2. Under the authority of and in accordance with guidelines laid down by the Conference of the Parties, and upon its request, this body shall:
(a) Provide scientific and technical assessments of the status of biological diversity;
(b) Prepare scientific and technical assessments of the effects of types of measures taken in accordance with the provisions of this Convention;
(c) Identify innovative, efficient and state-of-the-art technologies and know-how relating to the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity and advise on the ways and means of promoting development and/or transferring such technologies;
(d) Provide advice on scientific programmes and international cooperation in research and development related to conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity;
and (e) Respond to scientific, technical, technological and methodological questions that the Conference of the Parties and its subsidiary bodies may put to the body.
3. The functions, terms of reference, organization and operation of this body may be further elaborated by the Conference of the Parties.

Reports Each Contracting Party shall, at intervals to be determined by the Conference of the Parties, present to the Conference of the Parties, reports on measures which it has taken for the implementation of the provisions of this Convention and their effectiveness in meeting the objectives of this Convention.

Settlement of Disputes
1. In the event of a dispute between Contracting Parties concerning the interpretation or application of this Convention, the parties concerned shall seek solution by negotiation.
2. If the parties concerned cannot reach agreement by negotiation, they may jointly seek the good offices of, or request mediation by, a third party.
3. When ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding to this Convention, or at any time thereafter, a State or regional economic integration organization may declare in writing to the Depositary that for a dispute not resolved in accordance with paragraph 1 or paragraph 2 above, it accepts one or both of the following means of dispute settlement as compulsory:
(a) Arbitration in accordance with the procedure laid down in Part 1 of Annex II;
(b) Submission of the dispute to the International Court of Justice.
4. If the parties to the dispute have not, in accordance with paragaph 3 above, accepted the same or any procedure, the dispute shall be submitted to conciliation in accordance with Part 2 of Annex II unless the parties otherwise agree.
5. The provisions of this Article shall apply with respect to any protocol except as otherwise provided in the protocol concerned.

Adoption of Protocols
1. The Contracting Parties shall cooperate in the formulation and adoption of protocols to this Convention.
2. Protocols shall be adopted at a meeting of the Conference of the Parties.

3. The text of any proposed protocol shall be communicated to the Contracting Parties by the Secretariat at least six months before such a meeting.

Amendment of the Convention or Protocols
1. Amendments to this Convention may be proposed by any Contracting Party.
Amendments to any protocol may be proposed by any Party to that protocol.
2. Amendments to this Convention shall be adopted at a meeting of the Conference of the Parties. Amendments to any protocol shall be adopted at a meeting of the Parties to the Protocol in question. The text of any proposed amendment to this Convention or to any protocol, except as may otherwise be provided in such protocol, shall be communicated to the Parties to the instrument in question by the secretariat at least six months before the meeting at which it is proposed for adoption. The secretariat shall also communicate proposed amendments to the signatories to this Convention for information.
3. The Parties shall make every effort to reach agreement on any proposed amendment to this Convention or to any protocol by consensus. If all efforts at consensus have been exhausted, and no agreement reached, the amendment shall as a last resort be adopted by a two-third majority vote of the Parties to the instrument in question present and voting at the meeting, and shall be submitted by the Depositary to all Parties for ratification, acceptance or approval.
4. Ratification, acceptance or approval of amendments shall be notified to the Depositary in writing. Amendments adopted in accordance with paragraph 3 above shall enter into force among Parties having accepted them on the ninetieth day after the deposit of instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval by at least two thirds of the Contracting Parties to this Convention or of the Parties to the protocol concerned, except as may otherwise be provided in such protocol. Thereafter the amendments shall enter into force for any other Party on the ninetieth day after that Party deposits its instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval of the amendments.
5. For the purposes of this Article, “Parties present and voting” means Parties present and casting an affirmative or negative vote.

Adoption and Amendment of Annexes
1. The annexes to this Convention or to any protocol shall form an integral part of the Convention or of such protocol, as the case may be, and, unless expressly provided

otherwise, a reference to this Convention or its protocols constitutes at the same time a reference to any annexes thereto. Such annexes shall be restricted to procedural, scientific, technical and administrative matters.
2. Except as may be otherwise provided in any protocol with respect to its annexes, the following procedure shall apply to the proposal, adoption and entry into force of additional annexes to this Convention or of annexes to any protocol:
(a) Annexes to this Convention or to any protocol shall be proposed and adopted according to the procedure laid down in Article 29;
(b) Any Party that is unable to approve an additional annex to this Convention or an annex to any protocol to which it is Party shall so notify the Depositary, in writing, within one year from the date of the communication of the adoption by the Depositary. The Depositary shall without delay notify all Parties of any such notification received. A Party may at any time withdraw a previous declaration of objection and the annexes shall thereupon enter into force for that Party subject to subparagraph (c) below;
(c) On the expiry of one year from the date of the communication of the adoption by the Depositary, the annex shall enter into force for all Parties to this Convention or to any protocol concerned which have not submitted a notification in accordance with the provisions of subparagraph (b) above.
3. The proposal, adoption and entry into force of amendments to annexes to this Convention or to any protocol shall be subject to the same procedure as for the proposal, adoption and entry into force of annexes to the Convention or annexes to any protocol.
4. If an additional annex or an amendment to an annex is related to an amendment to this Convention or to any protocol, the additional annex or amendment shall not enter into force until such time as the amendment to the Convention or to the protocol concerned enters into force.

Right to Vote
1. Except as provided for in paragraph 2 below, each Contracting Party to this Convention or to any protocol shall have one vote.
2. Regional economic integration organizations, in matters within their competence, shall exercise their right to vote with a number of votes equal to the number of their member States which are Contracting Parties to this Convention or the relevant protocol.
Such organizations shall not exercise their right to vote if their member States exercise theirs, and vice versa.

Relationship between this Convention and Its Protocols
1. A State or a regional economic integration organization may not become a Party to a protocol unless it is, or becomes at the same time, a Contracting Party to this Convention.
2. Decisions under any protocol shall be taken only by the Parties to the protocol concerned. Any Contracting Party that has not ratified, accepted or approved a protocol may participate as an observer in any meeting of the parties to that protocol.

Signature This Convention shall be open for signature at Rio de Janeiro by all States and any regional economic integration organization from 5 June 1992 until 14 June 1992, and at the United Nations Headquarters in New York from 15 June 1992 to 4 June 1993.

Ratification, Acceptance or Approval
1. This Convention and any protocol shall be subject to ratification, acceptance or approval by States and by regional economic integration organizations. Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the Depositary.
2. Any organization referred to in paragraph 1 above which becomes a Contracting Party to this Convention or any protocol without any of its member States being a Contracting Party shall be bound by all the obligations under the Convention or the protocol, as the case may be. In the case of such organizations, one or more of whose member States is a Contracting Party to this Convention or relevant protocol, the organization and its member States shall decide on their respective responsibilities for the performance of their obligations under the Convention or protocol, as the case may be. In such cases, the organization and the member States shall not be entitled to exercise rights under the Convention or relevant protocol concurrently.
3. In their instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval, the organizations referred to in paragraph 1 above shall declare the extent of their competence with respect to the matters governed by the Convention or the relevant protocol. These organizations shall also inform the Depositary of any relevant modification in the extent of their competence.

Accession
1. This Convention and any protocol shall be open for accession by States and by regional economic integration organizations from the date on which the Convention or the protocol concerned is closed for signature. The instruments of accession shall be deposited with the Depositary.
2. In their instruments of accession, the organizations referred to in paragraph 1 above shall declare the extent of their competence with respect to the matters governed by the Convention or the relevant protocol. These organizations shall also inform the Depositary of any relevant modification in the extent of their competence.
3. The provisions of Article 34, paragraph 2, shall apply to regional economic integration organizations which accede to this Convention or any protocol.

Entry Into Force
1. This Convention shall enter into force on the ninetieth day after the date of deposit of the thirtieth instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession.
2. Any protocol shall enter into force on the ninetieth day after the date of deposit of the number of instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, specified in that protocol, has been deposited.
3. For each Contracting Party which ratifies, accepts or approves this Convention or accedes thereto after the deposit of the thirtieth instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, it shall enter into force on the ninetieth day after the date of deposit by such Contracting Party of its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession.
4. Any protocol, except as otherwise provided in such protocol, shall enter into force for a Contracting Party that ratifies, accepts or approves that protocol or accedes thereto after its entry into force pursuant to paragraph 2 above, on the ninetieth day after the date on which that Contracting Party deposits its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, or on the date on which this Convention enters into force for that Contracting Party, whichever shall be the later.
5. For the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2 above, any instrument deposited by a regional economic integration organization shall not be counted as additional to those deposited by member States of such organization.

Reservations No reservations may be made to this Convention.

Withdrawals
1. At any time after two years from the date on which this Convention has entered into force for a Contracting Party, that Contracting Party may withdraw from the Convention by giving written notification to the Depositary.
2. Any such withdrawal shall take place upon expiry of one year after the date of its receipt by the Depositary, or on such later date as may be specified in the notification of the withdrawal.
3. Any Contracting Party which withdraws from this Convention shall be considered as also having withdrawn from any protocol to which it is party.

Financial Interim Arrangements Provided that it has been fully restructured in accordance with the requirements of Article 21, the Global Environment Facility of the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Environment Programme and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development shall be the institutional structure referred to in Article 21 on an interim basis, for the period between the entry into force of this Convention and the first meeting of the Conference of the Parties or until the Conference of the Parties decides which institutional structure will be designated in accordance with Article 21.

Secretariat Interim Arrangements The secretariat to be provided by the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme shall be the secretariat referred to in Article 24, paragraph 2, on an interim basis for the period between the entry into force of this Convention and the first meeting of the Conference of the Parties.

Depositary The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall assume the functions of Depositary of this Convention and any protocols.

Authentic texts The original of this Convention, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the Secretary- General of the United Nations.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized to that effect, have signed this Convention.
Done at Rio de Janeiro on this fifth day of June, one thousand nine hundred and ninety-two.

Annex I Identification and Monitoring
1. Ecosystems and habitats: containing high diversity, large numbers of endemic or threatened species, or wilderness; required by migratory species; of social, economic, cultural or scientific importance; or, which are representative, unique or associated with key evolutionary or other biological processes;
2. Species and communities which are: threatened; wild relatives of domesticated or cultivated species; of medicinal, agricultural or other economic value; or social, scientific or cultural importance; or importance for research into the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, such as indicator species; and
3. Described genomes and genes of social, scientific or economic importance.
Annex II Part 1 Arbitration The claimant party shall notify the secretariat that the parties are referring a dispute to arbitration pursuant to Article 27. The notification shall state the subject-matter of arbitration and include, in particular, the articles of the Convention or the protocol, the interpretation or application of which are at issue. If the parties do not agree on the subject matter of the dispute before the President of the tribunal is designated, the arbitral tribunal shall determine the subject matter. The secretariat shall forward the information thus received to all Contracting Parties to this Convention or to the protocol concerned.
1. In disputes between two parties, the arbitral tribunal shall consist of three members.
Each of the parties to the dispute shall appoint an arbitrator and the two arbitrators so appointed shall designate by common agreement the third arbitrator who shall be the President of the tribunal. The latter shall not be a national of one of the parties to the dispute, nor have his or her usual place of residence in the territory of one of these parties, nor be employed by any of them, nor have dealt with the case in any other capacity.
2. In disputes between more than two parties, parties in the same interest shall appoint one arbitrator jointly by agreement.
3. Any vacancy shall be filled in the manner prescribed for the initial appointment.
1. If the President of the arbitral tribunal has not been designated within two months of the appointment of the second arbitrator, the Secretary-General of the United Nations shall, at the request of a party, designate the President within a further two-month period.

2. If one of the parties to the dispute does not appoint an arbitrator within two months of receipt of the request, the other party may inform the Secretary-General who shall make the designation within a further two-month period.
The arbitral tribunal shall render its decisions in accordance with the provisions of this Convention, any protocols concerned, and international law.
Unless the parties to the dispute otherwise agree, the arbitral tribunal shall determine its own rules of procedure.
The arbitral tribunal may, at the request of one of the parties, recommend essential interim measures of protection.
The parties to the dispute shall facilitate the work of the arbitral tribunal and, in particular, using all means at their disposal, shall:
(a) Provide it with all relevant documents, information and facilities; and (b) Enable it, when necessary, to call witnesses or experts and receive their evidence.
The parties and the arbitrators are under an obligation to protect the confidentiality of any information they receive in confidence during the proceedings of the arbitral tribunal.
Unless the arbitral tribunal determines otherwise because of the particular circumstances of the case, the costs of the tribunal shall be borne by the parties to the dispute in equal shares. The tribunal shall keep a record of all its costs, and shall furnish a final statement thereof to the parties.
Any Contracting Party that has an interest of a legal nature in the subject-matter of the dispute which may be affected by the decision in the case, may intervene in the proceedings with the consent of the tribunal.
The tribunal may hear and determine counterclaims arising directly out of the subjectmatter of the dispute.
Decisions both on procedure and substance of the arbitral tribunal shall be taken by a majority vote of its members.

If one of the parties to the dispute does not appear before the arbitral tribunal or fails to defend its case, the other party may request the tribunal to continue the proceedings and to make its award. Absence of a party or a failure of a party to defend its case shall not constitute a bar to the proceedings. Before rendering its final decision, the arbitral tribunal must satisfy itself that the claim is well founded in fact and law.
The tribunal shall render its final decision within five months of the date on which it is fully constituted unless it finds it necessary to extend the time-limit for a period which should not exceed five more months.
The final decision of the arbitral tribunal shall be confined to the subject-matter of the dispute and shall state the reasons on which it is based. It shall contain the names of the members who have participated and the date of the final decision. Any member of the tribunal may attach a separate or dissenting opinion to the final decision.
The award shall be binding on the parties to the dispute. It shall be without appeal unless the parties to the dispute have agreed in advance to an appellate procedure.
Any controversy which may arise between the parties to the dispute as regards the interpretation or manner of implementation of the final decision may be submitted by either party for decision to the arbitral tribunal which rendered it.
Part 2 Conciliation A conciliation commission shall be created upon the request of one of the parties to the dispute. The commission shall, unless the parties otherwise agree, be composed of five members, two appointed by each Party concerned and a President chosen jointly by those members.
In disputes between more than two parties, parties in the same interest shall appoint their members of the commission jointly by agreement. Where two or more parties have separate interests or there is a disagreement as to whether they are of the same interest, they shall appoint their members separately.
If any appointments by the parties are not made within two months of the date of the request to create a conciliation commission, the Secretary-General of the United Nations shall, if asked to do so by the party that made the request, make those appointments

within a further two-month period.
If a President of the conciliation commission has not been chosen within two months of the last of the members of the commission being appointed, the Secretary-General of the United Nations shall, if asked to do so by a party, designate a President within a further two-month period.
The conciliation commission shall take its decisions by majority vote of its members. It shall, unless the parties to the dispute otherwise agree, determine its own procedure. It shall render a proposal for resolution of the dispute, which the parties shall consider in good faith.
A disagreement as to whether the conciliation commission has competence shall be decided by the commission.

Printed on 100% recycled paper Printed in ICAO, Canada July 2011


================================================================================
SOURCE: Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 — Official CDSCO PDF.pdf
================================================================================

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY
WELFARE

(Department of Health)

THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS ACT
AND RULES

THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS ACT, 1940

(23 OF 1940)

(As amended up to the 31st December, 2016)

and

THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS RULES, 1945

(As amended up to the 31st December, 2016)

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS USED

A.O. 1950 ...
For Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 Cl. ... . ...
‖ Clause Ins. ...
‖ Inserted P. ...
‖ Page Pt. ...
‖ Part Reg. ...
‖ Regulation Rep. ...
‖ Repealed S. ...
‖ Section Sch. ...
‖ Schedule Sec. ...
‖ Section Subs. ...
‖ Substituted w.e.f. ...
‖ With effect from
CONTENTS

Pages

The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) ... 1−30

The Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 ... . . ... 31−546

iii THE DRUGS AND COSMETICE ACT, 1940

CHAPTER I INTRODUCTORY Sections

1. Short title, extent and commencement.

2. Application of other laws not barred.

3. Definitions.

3A.
Construction of references to any law not in force or any functionary not in existence in the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

4. Presumption as to poisonous substances.

CHAPTER II

THE DRUGS TECHNICAL ADVISORY BOARD, THE CENTRAL DRUGS LABORATORY
AND THE DRUGS CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE

5. The Drugs Technical Advisory Board.

6. The Central Drugs Laboratory.

7. The Drugs Consultative Committee.

7A.
Sections 5 and 7 not to apply to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs.

CHAPTER III

IMPORT OF DRUGS AND COSMETICS

8. Standards of quality.

9. Misbranded drugs.

9A. Adulterated drugs.

9B. Spurious drugs.

9C. Misbranded cosmetics.

9D. Spurious cosmetics.

10. Prohibition of import of certain drugs or cosmetics.

10A.
Power of Central Government to prohibit import of drugs and cosmetics in public interest.

11. Application of law relating to sea customs and powers of Customs officers.

12. Power of Central Government to make rules.

13. Offences.
14. Confiscation.

15. Jurisdiction.

CHAPTER IV

MANUFACTURE, SALE AND DISTRIBUTION OF DRUGS AND
COSMETICS

Sections

16. Standards of quality.
17. Misbranded drugs.
17A. Adulterated drugs.
17B. Spurious drugs.
17C. Misbranded cosmetics.
17D. Spurious cosmetics.
Prohibition of manufacture and sale of certain drugs and cosmetics.
18A. Disclosure of the name of the manufacturer, etc.
18B. Maintenance of records and furnishing of information.
19. Pleas.
20. Government Analysts.
21. Inspectors.
22. Powers of Inspectors.
23. Procedure of Inspectors.
Persons bound to disclose place where drugs or cosmetics are manufactured or kept.
25. Reports of Government Analysts.
26. Purchaser of drug or cosmetic enabled to obtain test or analysis.
26A.
Power of Central Government to prohibit manufacture, etc., of drug and cosmetic in public interest.
Penalty for manufacture, sale, etc., of drugs in contravention of this Chapter.
27A.
Penalty for manufacture, sale, etc., of cosmetics in contravention of this Chapter.
28. Penalty for non-disclosure of the name of the manufacturer, etc.
28A.
Penalty for not keeping documents, etc., and for non-disclosure of information.
28B.
Penalty for manufacture, etc. of drugs or cosmetics in contravention of section 26A.
29. Penalty for use of Government Analyst‘s report for advertising.
30. Penalty for subsequent offences.
31. Confiscation.
31A. Application of provisions to Government departments.
32. Cognizance of offences.
32A. Power of Court to implead the manufacturer, etc.
33. Power of Central Government to make rules.
33A. Chapter not to apply to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs.

CHAPTER IV A

PROVISIONS RELATING TO AYURVEDIC SIDDHA AND UNANI DRUGS

33B. Application of Chapter IV A.

Sections

33C. Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board.
33D. The Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative Committee.
33E. Misbranded drugs.
33EE. Adulterated drugs.
33EEA. Spurious drugs.
33EEB.
Regulation of manufacture for sale of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs.
33EEC. Prohibition of manufacture and sale of certain Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs.
33EED.
Power of Central Government to prohibit manufacture, etc., of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs in public interest.
33F. Government Analysts.
33G. Inspectors.
33H. Application of provisions of sections 22, 23, 24 and 33-I.
Penalty for manufacture, sale, etc., of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs in contravention of this Chapter.
33J. Penalty for subsequent offences.
33K. Confiscation.
33L. Application of provisions to Government departments.
33M. Cognizance of offences.
33N. Power of Central Government to make rules.
33O. Power to amend First Schedule.

CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS

33P. Power to give directions.
34. Offences by companies.
34A. Offences by Government departments.
34AA. Penalty vexatious search or seizure.
35. Publication of sentences passed under this Act.
36. Magistrate‘s power to impose enhanced penalties.
36A. Certain offences to be tried summarily.
37. Protection of action taken in good faith.
38. Rules to be laid before Parliament.

THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.

1 Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS ACT, 1940 (23 OF 1940)

[10th April, 1940.]

An Act to regulate the import, manufacture, distribution and sale of drugs

[and cosmetics];
WHEREAS it is expedient to regulate the

[import, manufacture, distribution and sale] of drugs

[and cosmetics];
AND WHEREAS the Legislature of all the Provinces have passed resolutions in terms of section 103 of the Government of India Act, 1935 (26 Geo. 5, c.2), in relation to such of the above-mentioned matters and matters ancillary thereto as are enumerated in List II of the Seventh Schedule to the said Act;

It is hereby enacted as follows:-

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY

1. Short title, extent and commencement.⎯ (1) This Act may be called the Drugs

[and Cosmetics] Act, 1940.

(2) It extends to the whole of India 4[ * * *].
(3) It shall come into force at once; but Chapter III shall take effect only from such date 5 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, and Chapter IV shall take effect in a particular State only from such date 5 as the State Government may, by like notification, appoint in this behalf:

[Provided that in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, Chapter III shall take effect only from such date10 after the commencement of the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Act, 1972 (19 of 1972), as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf.]

2. Application of other laws not barred.- The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of, the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 (2 of 1930), and any other law for the time being in force.

3. Definitions.—In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,

[(a) ―8[Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drug‖ includes all medicines intended for internal or external use for or in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of

[disease or disorder in human beings or animals, and manufactured] exclusively in accordance with the formulae described in, the authoritative books of

[Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Tibb systems of medicine], specified in the First Schedule;]

[(aa) ―the Board‖ means— (i) in relation to

[Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drug, the

[Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board] constituted under section 33C; and (ii) in relation to any other drug or cosmetic, the Drugs Technical Advisory Board constituted under section 5;]

1. For Statement of Object and Reasons, see Gazette of India, 1940, Pt. V, p. 34; for the Report of the Select Committee, see ibid., p. 143.
The Act has been applied to all the partially excluded areas in the State of Orissa, see Orissa Government Notification No. 3358-LSG., dated the 25th August, 1941.
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for certain words.
4. The words ―except the State of Jammu and Kashmir‖ omitted by Act 19 of 1972, s .2. (w.e.f. 31-5-1972).
5 1st April, 1947; see Notifn. No. F. 28 (10) (3) 45-H (1), dated the 2nd September 1946, Gazette of India, 1946, Pt. I, p.1349.
Chapter IV came into force in the States of Delhi, Ajmer and Coorg on the 1st April, 1947, see ibid., Chapters III and IV came into force in the States of Himachal Pradesh, Bilaspur, Kutch, Bhopal, Tripura, Vindhya Pradesh and Manipur on the 1st April, 1953, vide Notification No. S.R.O.
663, dated the 30th March, 1953, Gazette of India, Pt. II, Sec. 3, p. 451.
Chapter IV came into force in the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli w.e.f. 1st August, 1968, see Notification No. ADM/Law/117(74), dated the 20th July, 1968, Gazette of India, Pt. III, Sec. 3, p.128. The Act is extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Sch.
I; to Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 1963. s. 3 and Sch. I; to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch. and to Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands by Reg. 8 of 1965. s.3 and Sch.
6. Added by Act 19 of 1972, s. 2.
7 Ins. by Act 13 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).
9. Clause. (a) was relettered as cl. (aa) by Act 13 of 1964 s. 2, (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).
10. 24th August, 1974, vide notifin no. S.O. 2185, dt. 9th August, 1974.

[

[(aaa)] ―cosmetic‖ means any article intended to be rubbed, poured, sprinkled or sprayed on, or introduced into, or otherwise applied to, the human body or any part thereof for cleansing, beautifying, promoting attractiveness, or altering the appearance, and includes any article intended for use as a component of cosmetic

[* * *] ;]

[(b) ―drug‖ includes—

[(i) all medicines for internal or external use of human beings or animals and all substances intended to be used for or in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of any disease or disorder in human beings or animals, including preparations applied on human body for the purpose of repelling insects like mosquitoes;] (ii) such substances (other than food) intended to affect the structure or any function of the human body or intended to be used for the destruction of

[vermin] or insects which cause disease in human beings or animals, as may be specified from time to time by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette;]

[(iii) all substances intended for use as components of a drug including empty gelatin capsules; and (iv) such devices* intended for internal or external use in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of disease or disorder in human beings or animals, as may be specified from time to time by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette, after consultation with the Board;]

[(c) ―Government Analyst‖ means— (i) in relation to

[Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drug, a Government Analyst appointed by the Central Government or a State Government under section 33F; and (ii) in relation to any other drug or cosmetic, a Government Analyst appointed by the Central Government or a State Government under section 20;]

[* * * * *]

[(e) ―Inspector‖ means— (i) in relation to

[Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drug, an Inspector appointed by the Central Government or a State Government under section 33G; and (ii) in relation to any other drug or cosmetic, an Inspector appointed by the Central Government or a State Government under section 21;]

[

[(f)] ―manufacture‖ in relation to any drug

[or cosmetic] includes any process or part of a process for making, altering, ornamenting, finishing, packing, labelling, breaking up or otherwise treating or adopting any drug

[or cosmetic] with a view to its

[sale or distribution] but does not include the compounding or dispensing

[of any drug, or the packing of any drug or cosmetic,] in the ordinary course of retail business; and ―to manufacture‖ shall be construed accordingly;]

17[(g)] ―to import‖, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions means to bring into 18[India];

2. Clause. (aa) relettered by Act 13 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).
3. omitted by Act 68 of 1982, s.3, certain words.
4. Subs. by Act 11 of 1955, s. 2, for cl. (b).
5. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
6. Subs. by Act 13 of 1964, s. 2, for ―vermins‖ (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).
7. Ins. by Act 68 of 1982, s.3 (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
The Central Government has specified (vide S.O. 1468 (E), dated 6-10-2005) the following devices intended for external or internal use in human beings or drugs with immediate effect, namely:- (i) Cardiac Stents (ii) Drug Eluding Stents (iii) Catheters (iv) Intra Ocular Lenses (v) I.V. Cannulac (vi) Bone Cements (vii) Heart Valves (viii) Scalp Vein Set (ix) Orthopaedic Implants (x) Internal Prosthetic Replacements
8. Subs. by Act 13 of 1964, s. 2, for cl. (c) (w.e.f.15-9-1964).
9. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982 s.2, for ―Ayurvedic (including sidda) or Unani‖ (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
10. Cl. (d) omitted by Act 19 of 1972, s. 3. 15. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s.3, for ―sale and distribution‖(w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
11. Subs. by Act 13 of 1964, s. 2, for cl. (e) (w.e.f. 15-9-1964). 16. Subs. by Act 21 of 1962 s. 4, for ―or the packing of any drug‖.
12. Ins. by Act 11 of 1955, s. 2. 17. Cls.(c), (d) and (e) relettered as cls. (g), (h) and (i) respectively by Act 35 of 1960, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16-3-1961).
13. Clause. (bbb) relettered as cl. (f) by Act 35 of 1960, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16-3-1961).
14. Ins. by Act 21 of 1962, s. 4 (w.e.f. 27-7-1964). 18. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for ―the States‖.

[

[(h)] ―patent or proprietary medicine‖ means,—

(i) in relation to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani Tibb systems of medicine all formulations containing only such ingredients mentioned in the formulae described in the authoritative books of Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani Tibb systems of medicine specified in the First Schedule, but does not include a medicine which is administered by parenteral route and also a formulation included in the authoritative books as specified in clause (a);
(ii) in relation to any other systems of medicine, a drug which is a remedy or prescription presented in a form ready for internal or external administration of human beings or animals and which is not included in the edition of the Indian Pharmacopoeia for the time being or any other Pharmacopoeia authorised in this behalf by the Central Government after consultation with the Drugs Technical Advisory Board constituted under section 5;]

[

[(i)] ―prescribed‖ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.]

[* * * * *]

[3A. Construction of references to any law not in force or any functionary not in existence in the State of Jammu and Kashmir.—Any reference in this Act to any law which is not in force, or any functionary not in existence, in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, shall, in relation to that State, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law in force, or to the corresponding functionary in existence, in that State.]

4. Presumption as to poisonous substances.—Any substance specified as poisonous by rule made under Chapter III or Chapter IV

[or Chapter IVA] shall be deemed to be a poisonous substance for the purposes of Chapter III or Chapter IV 6 [or Chapter IVA], as the case may be.

CHAPTER II

THE DRUGS TECHNICAL ADVISORY BOARD, THE CENTRAL DRUGS LABOURATORY
AND THE DRUGS CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE

5. The Drugs Technical Advisory Board.—(1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, constitute a Board (to be called the Drugs Technical Advisory Board) to advise the Central Government and the State Governments on technical matters arising out of the administration of this Act and to carry out the other functions assigned to it by this Act.

[(2) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:—

(i) the Director General of Health Services, ex officio, who shall be Chairman; (ii) the Drugs Controller, India, ex officio;
(iii) the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory, Calcutta, ex officio;
(iv) the Director of the Central Research Institute, Kasauli, ex officio;
(v) the Director of Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, ex officio;
(vi) the President of Medical Council of India, ex officio;
(vii) the President of the Pharmacy Council of India, ex officio;
(viii) the Director of Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, ex officio;
(ix) two persons to be nominated by the Central Government from among persons who are in charge of drugs control in the States;

1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 3, for cl. (h) (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
2. Cls. (c), (d) and (e) relettered as cls. (g), (h) and (i) respectively by Act 35 of 1960, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16-3-1961).
3. Subs. by Act 11 of 1955, s. 2, for cl. (e).
4. Clause. (f) ins. by the A.O. 1950 and omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch.

(x) one person, to be elected by the Executive Committee of the Pharmacy Council of India, from among teachers in pharmacy or pharmaceutical chemistry or pharmacognosy on the staff of an Indian university or a college affiliated thereto;

(xi) one person, to be elected by the Executive Committee of the Medical Council of India, from among teachers in medicine or therapeutics on the staff of an Indian university or a college affiliated thereto;

(xii) one person to be nominated by the Central Government from the pharmaceutical industry;

(xiii) one pharmacologist to be elected by the Governing Body of the Indian Council of Medical Research;

(xiv) one person to be elected by the Central Council of the Indian Medical Association;

(xv) one person to be elected by the Council of the Indian Pharmaceutical Association;

(xvi) two persons holding the appointment of Government Analyst under this Act, to be nominated by the Central Government.]

(3) The nominated and elected members of the Board shall hold office for three years, but shall be eligible for re- nomination and re-election:

[Provided that the person nominated or elected, as the case may be, under clause (ix) or clause (x) or clause (xi) or clause (xvi) of sub-section (2) shall hold office for so long as he holds the appointment of the office by virtue of which he was nominated or elected to the Board.]

(4) The Board may, subject to the previous approval of the Central Government, make bye-laws fixing a quorum and regulating its own procedure and the conduct of all business to be transacted by it.

(5) The Board may constitute sub-committees and may appoint to such sub-committees for such periods, not exceeding three years, as it may decide, or temporarily for the consideration of particular matters, persons who are not members of the Board.

(6) The functions of the Board may be exercised notwithstanding any vacancy therein.

(7) The Central Government shall appoint a person to be Secretary of the Board and shall provide the Board with such clerical and other staff as the Central Government considers necessary.

6. The Central Drugs Laboratory.—(1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, established a Central Drugs Laboratory under the control of a Director to be appointed by the Central Government, to carry out the functions entrusted to it by this Act or any rules made under this Chapter:
Provided that, if the Central Government so prescribes, the functions of the Central Drugs Laboratory in respect of any drug or class of drugs

[or cosmetic or class of cosmetics] shall be carried out at the Central Research Institute, Kasauli, or at any other prescribed Laboratory and the functions of the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory in respect of such drug or class of drugs

[or such cosmetic or class of cosmetics] shall be exercised by the Director of that Institute or of that other Laboratory, as the case may be.

(2) the Central Government may, after consultation with the Board, make rules prescribing— (a) the functions of the Central Drugs Laboratory;

[* * * * *] (d) the procedure for the submission to the said Laboratory

[under Chapter IV or Chapter IVA] of samples of drugs

[or cosmetics] for analysis or test, the forms of Laboratory‘s reports thereon and the fees payable in respect of such reports;

1. Subs. by Act 13 of 1964, s. 4, for the proviso (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).
3. Cls. (b) and (c) omitted by Act 11 of 1955, s. 4.
4. Subs. by Act 13 of 1964, s. 5, for ―under Chapter IV‖ (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).

(e) such other matters as may be necessary or expedient to enable the said Laboratory to carry out its functions;

(f) the matters necessary to be prescribed for the purposes of the proviso to sub-section (1).

7. The Drugs Consultative Committee.—(1) The Central Government may constitute an advisory committee to be called ―the Drugs Consultative Committee‖ to advise the Central Government, the State Governments and the Drugs Technical Advisory Board on any other matter tending to secure uniformity throughout 1 [India] in the administration of this Act.

(2) The Drugs Consultative Committee shall consist of two representatives of the Central Government to be nominated by that Government and one representative of each State Government to be nominated by the State Government concerned.

(3) The Drugs Consultative Committee shall meet when required to do so by the Central Government and shall have power to regulate its own procedure.

2[7A. Sections 5 and 7 not to apply to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs.—Nothing contained in sections 5 and 7 shall apply to 3[Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drugs.]

CHAPTER III

[IMPORT OF DRUGS AND COSMETICS]

8. Standards of quality.—

[(1) For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression ―standard quality‖ means— (a) in relation to a drug, that the drug complies with the standard set out in

[the Second Schedule], and (b) in relation to a cosmetic, that the cosmetic compiles with such standard as may be prescribed].

(2) The Central Government, after consultation with the Board and after giving by notification in the Official Gazette not less than three months‘ notice of its intention so to do, may by a like notification add to or otherwise amend

[the Second Schedule], for the purposes of this Chapter, and thereupon

[the Second Schedule] shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.

[9. Misbranded drugs.—For the purposes of this Chapter a drug shall be deemed to be misbranded—

(a) if it is so coloured, coated, powdered or polished that damage is concealed or if it is made to appear of better or greater therapeutic value than it really is; or

(b) if it is not labelled in the prescribed manner; or

(c) if its label or container or anything accompanying the drug bears any statement, design or device which makes any false claim for the drug or which is false or misleading in any particular.]

[9A. Adulterated drugs.— For the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be deemed to be adulterated.—

(a) if it consists, in whole or in part, of any filthy, putrid or decomposed substance; or (b) if it has been prepared, packed or stored under insanitary conditions whereby it may have been contaminated with filth or whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health; or

1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for ―the States‖.
3. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 2 for certain words (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
4. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 4, for ―IMPORT OF DRUGS‖ (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
6. Subs. by Act 13 of 1964, s. 7, for ―the Schedule‖ (w..e.f. 15-9-1964).
7. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 5, for s. 9 (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
8. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 6, (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

(c) if its container is composed in whole or in part, of any poisonous or deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to health; or (d) if it bears or contains, for purposes of colouring only, a colour other than one which is prescribed; or (e) if it contains any harmful or toxic substance which may render it injurious to health; or (f) if any substance has been mixed therewith so as to reduce its quality or strength.

9B. Spurious drugs.— For the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be deemed to be spurious— (a) if it is imported under a name which belongs to another drug; or (b) if it is an imitation of, or a substitute for, another drug or resembles another drug in a manner likely to deceive or bears upon it or upon its label or container the name of another drug unless it is plainly and conspicuously marked so as to reveal its true character and its lack of identity with such other drug; or (c) if the label or the container bears the name of an individual or company purporting to be the manufacturer of the drug, which individual or company is fictitious or does not exist; or (d) if it has been substituted wholly or in part by another drug or substance; or (e) if it purports to be the product of a manufacturer of whom it is not truly a product.

9C. Misbranded cosmetics.—For the purposes of this chapter, a cosmetic shall be deemed to be misbranded—

(a) if it contains a colour which is not prescribed; or

(b) if it is not labelled in a prescribed manner; or

(c) if the label or container or anything accompanying the cosmetic bears any statement which is false or misleading in any particular.

9D. Spurious cosmetics.—For the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be deemed to be spurious,—

(a) if it is imported under the name which belongs to another cosmetic; or

(b) if it is an imitation of, or is a substitute for, another cosmetic or resembles another cosmetic in a manner likely to deceive or bears upon it or upon its label or container the name of another cosmetic, unless it is plainly or conspicuously marked so as to reveal its true character and its lack of identity with such other cosmetic; or

(c) if the label or the container bears the name of an individual or company purporting to be the manufacturer of the cosmetic, which individual or company is fictitious or does not exist; or

(d) if it purports to be the product of a manufacturer of whom it is not truly a product.]

10. Prohibition of import of certain drugs or cosmetics.— From such date 1 as may be fixed by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette in this behalf, no person shall import—

(a) any drug

[or cosmetic] which is not of standard quality;

3[(b) any misbranded drug 4[or misbranded or spurious cosmetic;]

1. 1st April, 1947 for cls. (a), (b), (c), (e) and (f) and 1st April 1949 for cl. (d) see Notifn. No.18- 12/46-D (I), dated the 11th February 1947, Gazette of India, 1947, Pt. 1, P. 189 as amended by Notifn. No.F.1-2/48-D (1), dated the 29th September,1948.
1st April, 1953 for the States of Himachal Pradesh, Bilaspur, Kutch, Bhopal,Tripura, Vindhya Pradesh and Manipur; vide Notifn. No. S.R.O. 666, dated the 30th March, 1953, Gazette of India, 1953, Pt. II, Sec. 3, p.451.
3. Subs. by Act 21 of 1962, s. 8, for cl. (b) (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).
4. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s.7, for ―or misbranded cosmetic‖ (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

[(bb) any

[adulterated or spurious] drug;] (c) any drug

[or cosmetic] for the import of which a licence is prescribed, otherwise than under, and in accordance with, such licence;

4[(d) any patent or proprietary medicine, unless there is displayed in the prescribed manner on the label or container thereof 5[the true formula or list of active ingredients contained in it, together with the quantities thereof;]

(e) any drug which by means of any statement, design or device accompanying it or by any other means, purports or claims to cure or mitigate any such disease or ailment, or to have any such other effect, as may be prescribed;

3[(ee) any cosmetic containing any ingredient which may render it unsafe or harmful for use under the directions indicated or recommended;]

(f) any drug 3[or cosmetic] the import of which is prohibited by rule made under this Chapter:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the import, subject to prescribed conditions, of small quantities of any drug for the purpose of examination, test or analysis or for personal use:

Provided further that the Central Government may, after consultation with the Board, by notification in the Official Gazette, permit, subject to any conditions specified in the notification, the import of any drug or class of drugs not being of standard quality.

[* * * * *]

[10A. Power of Central Government to prohibit import of drugs and cosmetics in public interest.— Without prejudice to any other provision contained in this Chapter, if the Central Government is satisfied that the use of any drug or cosmetic is likely to involve any risk to human beings or animals or that any drug does not have the therapeutic value claimed for it or contains ingredients and in such quantity for which there is no therapeutic justification and that in the public interest it is necessary or expedient so to do then, that Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, prohibit the import of such drug or cosmetic.]

11. Application of law relating to sea customs and powers of Customs Officers.— (1) The law for the time being in force relating to sea customs and to goods, the import of which is prohibited by section 18 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 (8 of 1878)

shall, subject to the provisions of section 13 of this Act, apply in respect of drugs

[and cosmetics] the import of which is prohibited under this Chapter, and officers of Customs and officers empowered under that Act to perform the duties imposed thereby on a

[Commissioners of Customs] and other officers of Customs, shall have the same powers in respect of such drugs

[and cosmetics] as they have for the time being in respect of such goods as aforesaid.

[(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-sections (1), the

[Commissioners of Customs] any officer of the Government authorized by the Central Government in this behalf, may detain any imported package which he suspects to contain any drug

[or cosmetic] the import of which is prohibited under this Chapter and shall forthwith report such detention to the Drugs Controller, India, and, if necessary, forward the package or sample of any suspected drug

[or cosmetic] found therein to the Central Drugs Laboratory.]

12. Power of Central Government to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may,

[after consultation with or on the recommendation of the Board] and after previous publication by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Chapter:

2. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s.7, for ―adulterated‖ (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
4. Subs. by Act 11 of 1955, s. 5, for cl. (d).
5. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s.7, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
6. Explanation omitted by s.7, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
7. Ins. by s. 8, Act 68 of 1982. (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
8. Now see the Customs Act, 1962.
9. Ins. by Act 21of 1962, s. 9 (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).
10. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 83, for ―Customs Collector‖.
11. Subs. by Act 11 of 1955, s. 6, for sub-section (2).
12. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s.9, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

[Provided that consultation with the Board may be dispensed with if the Central Government is of opinion that circumstances have arisen which render it necessary to make rules without such consultation, but in such a case the Board shall be consulted within six months of the making of the rules and the Central Government shall take into consideration any suggestions which the Board may make in relation to the amendment of the said rules.]

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the forgoing power, such rules may— (a) specify the drugs or classes of drugs

[or cosmetics or classes of cosmetics] for the import of which a licence is required,

[and prescribe the form and conditions of such licences, the authority empowered to issue the same, the fees payable therefor and provide for the cancellation, or suspension of such licence in any case where any provision of this Chapter or the rules made thereunder is contravened or any of the conditions subject to which the licence is issued is not complied with];
(b) prescribe the methods of test or analysis to be employed in determining whether a drug

[or cosmetic] is of standard quality;
(c) prescribe, in respect of biological and organometallic compounds, the units or methods of standardization;

[(cc) prescribe under clause (d) of

[section 9A] the colour or colours which a drug may bear or contain for purposes or colouring;] (d) specify the diseases or ailments which an imported drug may not purport or claim

[to prevent, cure or mitigate] and such other effects which such drug may not purport or claim to have;
(e) prescribe the conditions subject to which small quantities of drugs, the import of which is otherwise prohibited under this Chapter, may be imported for the purpose of examination, test or analysis or for personal use;
(f) prescribe the places at which drugs

[or cosmetics] may be imported, and prohibit their import at any other place;
(g) require the date of manufacture and the date of expiry of potency to be clearly and truly stated on the label or container of any specified imported drug or class of such drug, and prohibit the import of the said drug or class of drug after the expiry of a specified period from the date of manufacture;
(h) regulate the submission by importers, and the securing, of samples of drugs

[or cosmetics] for examination, test or analysis by the Central Drugs Laboratory, and prescribe the fees, if any, payable for such examination, test or analysis;
(i) prescribe the evidence to be supplied, whether by accompanying documents or otherwise, of the quality of drugs 2[or cosmetics] sought to be imported, the procedure of officers of Customs in dealing with such evidence, and the manner of storage at places of import of drugs 2[or cosmetics] detained pending admission;
(j) provide for the exemption, conditionally or otherwise, from all or any of the provisions of this Chapter and the rules made thereunder of drugs

[or cosmetics] imported for the purpose only of transport through, an export from,

[India];
(k) prescribe the conditions to be observed in the packing in bottles, packages or other containers, of imported drugs 2[or cosmetics] 8[including the use of packing material which comes into direct contact with the drugs];
(l) regulate the mode of labeling drugs

[or cosmetics] imported for sale in packages, and prescribe the matters which shall or shall not be included in such labels;
(m) prescribe the maximum proportion of any poisonous substance which may be added to or contained in any imported drug, prohibit the import of any drug in which that proportion is exceeded, and specify substances which shall be deemed to be poisonous for the purposes of this Chapter and the rules made thereunder;

1. Ins. by Act 11 of 1955, s. 7.
2. Ins. by Act 21of 1962, s. 10 (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).
5. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 9, for ―section 9B‖ (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
6. Subs. by Act 11 of 1955, s. 7, for ―to cure or mitigate‖.
7. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for ―the States‖.

(n) require that the accepted scientific name of any specified drug shall be displayed in the prescribed manner on the label or wrapper of any imported, patent or proprietary medicine containing such drug;
(o) provide for the exemption, conditionally or otherwise, from all or any of the provisions of this Chapter or the rules made thereunder, of any specified drug or class of drugs 1[or cosmetic or class of cosmetics].

2[13. Offences.—(1) Whoever himself or by any other person on his behalf imports, — (a) any drug deemed to be adulterated under section 9A or deemed to be a spurious drug under section 9B or any spurious cosmetic referred to in section 9D or any cosmetic of the nature referred to in clause (ee) of section 10 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and a fine which may extend to five thousand rupees;
(b) any drug or cosmetic other than a drug or cosmetic referred to in clause (a), the import of which is prohibited under section 10, or any rule made under this Chapter, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both;
(c) any drug or cosmetic in contravention of the provisions of any notification issued under section 10A, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both;
(2) Whoever having been convicted of an offence— (a) under clause (a) or clause (c) of sub-section (1), is again convicted of an offence under that clause, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both;
(b) under clause (b) of sub-section (1), is again convicted of an offence under that clause, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

(3) The punishment provided by this section shall be in addition to any penalty to which the offender may be liable under the provisions of section 11.]

14. Confiscation.—Where any offence punishable under section 13 has been committed, the consignment of the drugs 3[or cosmetics] in respect of which the offence has been committed shall be liable to confiscation.

15. Jurisdiction.—No Court inferior to that

[of a Metropolitan Magistrate or of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class] shall try an offence punishable under section 13.

CHAPTER IV

MANUFACTURE, SALE AND DISTRIBUTION OF

[DRUGS AND COSMETICS]

16. Standards of quality.—

[(1) For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression ―standard quality‖ means— (a) in relation to a drug, that the drug complies with the standard set out in

[the Second Schedule], and (b) in relation to a cosmetic, that the cosmetic complies with such standard as may be prescribed.] (2) The

[Central Government], after consultation with the Board and after giving by notification in the Official Gazette not less than three months‘ notice of its intention so to do, may by a like notification add to or otherwise amend

[the Second Schedule] for the purposes of this Chapter, and thereupon 7[the Second Schedule] shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.

2. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s.10, for s.13 (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
5. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982 for ―DRUGS‖ (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
7. Subs. by Act 13 of 1964, s. 11, for ―the Schedule‖ (w.e.f 15-9-1964).
8. Subs. by Act 11 of 1955, s. 8, for ―State Government‖.

[17. Misbranded drugs.—For the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be deemed to be misbranded,— (a) if it is so coloured, coated, powdered or polished that damage is concealed or if it is made to appear of betapeutic value than it really is; or (b) if it is not labelled in the prescribed manner; or (c) if its label or container or anything accompanying the drug bears any statement, design or device which makes any false claim for the drug or which is false or misleading in any particular.

17A. Adulterated drugs.—For the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be deemed to be adulterated,— (a) if it consists in whole or in part, of any filthy, putrid or decomposed substance; or (b) if it has been prepared, packed or stored under insanitary conditions whereby it may have been contaminated with filth or whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health; or (c) if its container is composed, in whole or in part, of any poisonous or deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to health; or (d) if it bears or contains, for the purposes of colouring only, a colour other than one which is prescribed; or (e) if it contains any harmful or toxic substance which may render it injurious to health; or (f) if any substance has been mixed therewith so as to reduce its quality or strength.

17B. Spurious drugs.—For the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be deemed to be spurious,— (a) if it is manufactured under a name which belongs to another drug; or (b) if it is an imitation of, or is a substitute for, another drug or resembles another drug in a manner likely to deceive or bears upon it or upon its label or container the name of another drug unless it is plainly and conspicuously marked so as to reveal its true character and its lack of identity with such other drug; or (c) if the label or container bears the name of an individual or company purporting to be the manufacturer of the drug , which individual or company is fictitious or does not exist; or (d) if it has been substituted wholly or in part by another drug or substance; or (e) if it purports to be the product of a manufacturer of whom it is not truly a product.

17C. Misbranded cosmetics.— For the purposes of this Chapter, a cosmetic shall be deemed to be misbranded, -- (a) if it contains a colour which is not prescribed; or (b) if it is not labelled in the prescribed manner; or (c) if the label or container or anything accompanying the cosmetic bears any statement which is false or misleading in any particular.

17D. Spurious cosmetics.—For the purposes of this Chapter, a cosmetic shall be deemed to be spurious,-- (a) if it is manufactured under a name which belongs to another cosmetic; or (b) if it is an imitation of, or a substitute for, another cosmetic or resembles another cosmetic in a manner likely to deceive or bears upon it or upon its label or container the name of another cosmetic unless it is plainly and conspicuously marked so as to reveal its true character and its lack of identity with such other cosmetic; or (c) if the label or container bears the name of an individual or a company purporting to be the manufacturer of the cosmetic which individual or company is fictitious or does not exist; or

(d) if it purports to be the product of a manufacturer of whom it is not truly a product.]

2[17E Adulterated cosmetics.- For the purposes of this Chapter, a cosmetic shall be deemed to be adulterated,- (a) if it consists in whole or in part, of any filthy, putrid or decomposed substance; or (b) if it has been prepared, packed or stored under insanitary conditions whereby it may have been contaminated with filth or whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health; or (c) if its container is composed, in whole or in part, of any poisonous or deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to health; or (d) if it bears or contains, for purposes of colouring only, a colour other than one which is prescribed; or (e) if it contains any harmful or toxic substance which may render it injurious to health; or (f) if any substance has been mixed therewith so as to reduce its quality or strength.]

1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s.13, for s.17, 17A and 17B (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
2. Ins. by Act 26 of 2008, s 2 (w.e.f 10-8-2009)

18. Prohibition of manufacture and sale of certain drugs and cosmetics.—From such date 1as may be fixed by the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette in this behalf, no person shall himself or by any other person on his behalf— (a)

[manufacture for sale or for distribution, or sell, or stock or exhibit or offer for sale] or distribute—

[(i) any drug which is not of a standard quality, or is misbranded, adulterated or spurious;
12[(ii) any cosmetic which is not of a standard quality or is misbranded or spurious;]

[(iii) any patent or proprietary medicine, unless there is displayed in the prescribed manner on the label or container thereof

[the true formula or list of active ingredients contained in it together with the quantities thereof];] (iv) any drug which by means of any statement, design or device accompanying it or by any other means, purports or claims 4[to prevent, cure or mitigate] any such disease or ailment, or to have any such other effect as may be prescribed;
5[(v) any cosmetic containing any ingredient which may render it unsafe or harmful for use under the directions indicated or recommended;
(vi) any drug or cosmetic in contravention of any of the provisions of this Chapter or any rule made thereunder;]

(b) 6[sell, or stock or exhibit or offer for sale,] or distribute any drug 7[or cosmetic] which has been imported or manufactured in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder;

(c)

[manufacture for sale or for distribution, or sell, or stock or exhibit or offer for sale,] or distribute any drug

[or cosmetic], except under, and in accordance with the conditions of, a licence issued for such purpose under this Chapter:

Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the manufacture, subject to prescribed conditions, of small quantities of any drug for the purpose of examination, test or analysis:

Provided further that the

[Central Government] may, after consultation with the Board, by notification in the Official Gazette, permit, subject to any conditions specified in the notification, the

[manufacture for sale, or for distribution, sale, stocking or exhibiting or offering for sale] or distribution of any drug or class of drugs not being of standard quality.

[* * * * *]

[18A. Disclosure of the name of the manufacturer, etc.—Every person, not being the manufacturer of a drug or cosmetic or his agent for the distribution thereof, shall, if so required, disclose to the Inspector the name, address and other particulars of the person from whom he acquired the drug or cosmetic.]

[18B. Maintenance of records and furnishing of information.—Every person holding a licence under clause (c) of section 18 shall keep and maintain such records, registers and other documents as may be prescribed and shall furnish to any officer or authority exercising any power or discharging any function under this Act such information as is required by such officer or authority for carrying out the purposes of this Act.]

1. 1st April,1947 for sub-clauses (i), (ii), (iv) and (v) of clause (a) and clauses (b) and (c) ; 1st April, 1949 for sub-clause (iii) of clause (a) in so far as it takes effect in Delhi, Ajmer and Coorg, see Notifn. No. 18-12/46-D. II, dated the 11th February, 1947. Gazette of India, 1947, Pt. I, p.189; as amended by Notifn. No. F. 1-2/48-D(II), dated the 29th September, 1948; 1st April, 1953 for the States of Himachal Pradesh, Bilaspur, Kutch, Bhopal, Tripura, Vindhya Pradesh and Manipur, vide Notifn. No. S.R.O. 664, dated the 30th March,1953, Gazette of India, 1953, Pt. II, Sec. 3, p.
2. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s.14, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
3. Subs. by Act 11 of 1955, s. 9, for sub-clause (iii).
4. Subs. by Act 11 of 1955, s. 9, for ―to cure or mitigate‖.
5. Subs. by Act 21 of 1962, s. 14, for sub-clause (v) (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).
6. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 14, for certain words (w.e.f.1-2-1983).
7. Ins. by Act. 21 of 1962, s. 14 (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).
8. Subs. by Act 11 of 1955, s. 9, for ―State Government‖.
9. Explanation omitted by Act 68 of 1982, s.14 (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
12. Sub. by Act 26 of 2008, s 3, for sub-clause (ii) (w.e.f 10-8-2009), before substitution, stood as under :
―any cosmetic which is not of a standard quality or is misbranded or spurious‖

19. Pleas.—(1) Save as hereinafter provided in this section, it shall be no defence in a prosecution under this Chapter to prove merely that the accused was ignorant of the nature, substance or quality of the drug

[or cosmetic] in respect of which the offence has been committed or of the circumstances of its manufacture or import, or that a purchaser, having bought only for the purpose of test or analysis, has not been prejudiced by the sale.
(2)

[For the purposes of section 18 a drug shall not be deemed to be misbranded or

[adulterated or spurious] or to be below standard quality nor shall a cosmetic be deemed to be misbranded or to be below standard quality] only by reason of the fact that—

(a) there has been added thereto some innocuous substance or ingredient because the same is required for manufacture or preparation of the drug

[or cosmetic] as an article of commerce in a state fit for carriage or consumption, and not to increase the bulk, weight or measure of the drug

[or cosmetic] or to conceal its inferior quality or other defects; or

[* * * * *] (b) in the process of manufacture, preparation or conveyance some extraneous substance has unavoidably become intermixed with it: Provided that this clause shall not apply in relation to any sale or distribution of the drug 1[or cosmetic] occurring after the vendor or distributor became aware of such intermixture.
5[(3) A person, not being the manufacturer of a drug or cosmetic or his agent for the distribution thereof, shall not be liable for a contravention of section 18 if he proves— (a) that he acquired the drug or cosmetic from a duly licensed manufacturer, distributor or dealer thereof;
(b) that he did not know and could not, with reasonable diligence, have ascertained that the drug or cosmetic in any way contravened the provisions of that section; and (c) that the drug or cosmetic, while in his possession, was properly stored and remained in the same state as when he acquired it.]

[20.Government Analysts.— (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Government Analysts for such areas in the state and in respect of such drugs or

[classes of drugs or such cosmetics or classes of cosmetics] as may be specified in the notification.

(2) The Central Government may also, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Government Analysts in respect of such drugs or

[classes of drugs or such cosmetics or classes of cosmetics] as may be specified in the notification.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), neither the Central Government nor a State Government shall appoint as a Government Analyst any official not serving under it without the previous consent of the Government under which he is serving.

[(4) No person who has any financial interest in the import, manufacture or sale of drugs or cosmetics shall be appointed to be a Government Analyst under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of this section.]

21. Inspectors.—(1) The Central Government or a State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Inspectors for such areas as may be assigned to them by the Central Government or State Government, as the case may be.
(2) The powers which may be exercised by an Inspector and the duties which may be performed by him, the drugs or 9[classes of drugs or cosmetics or classes of cosmetics] in relation to which and the conditions, limitations or restrictions subject to which, such powers and duties may be exercised or performed shall be such as may be prescribed.

1. Ins. by Act 21 of 1962, s.15 (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).
3. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s.16, for ―adulterated‖ (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
4. Cl.(aa) ins. by Act 11 of 1955, s. 10 and omitted by Act 13 of 1964, s. 15 (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).
5. Subs.by Act 13 of 1964, s. 15, for sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).
6. Subs. by Act 35 of 1960, s. 4, for ss. 20 and 21 (w.e.f. 16-3-1961).
7. Subs. by Act 21 of 1962, s. 16, for ―class of drugs‖ (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).
8. Ins. by Act 68 of 1982, s.17 (w.e.f.1-2-1983).
9. Subs. by Act 21 of 1962, s.17, for ―class of drugs‖ (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).

(3) No person who has any financial interest

[in the import, manufacture or sale of drugs or cosmetics] shall be appointed to be an Inspector under this section.

(4) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), and shall be officially subordinate to such authority

[having the prescribed qualifications,] as the Government appointing him may specify in this behalf.]

[22. Powers of Inspectors.—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 23 and of any rules made by the Central Government in this behalf, an Inspector may, within the local limits of the area for which he is appointed,—

[(a) inspect,— (i) any premises wherein any drug or cosmetic is being manufactured and the means employed for standardising and testing the drug or cosmetic;
(ii) any premises wherein any drug or cosmetic is being sold, or stocked or exhibited or offered for sale, or distributed;

(b) take samples of any drug or cosmetic,— (i) which is being manufactured or being sold or is stocked or exhibited or offered for sale, or is being distributed;

(ii) from any person who is in the course of conveying, delivering or preparing to deliver such drug or cosmetic to a purchaser or a consignee;

(c) at all reasonable times, with such assistance, if any, as he considers necessary,--

(i) search any person, who, he has reason to believe, has secreted about his person, any drug or cosmetic in respect of which an offence under this Chapter has been, or is being, committed; or

(ii) enter and search any place in which he has reason to believe that an offence under this Chapter has been, or is being, committed; or

(iii) stop and search any vehicle, vessel or other conveyance which, he has reason to believe, is being used for carrying any drug or cosmetic in respect of which an offence under this Chapter has been, or is being, committed,

and order in writing the person in possession of the drug or cosmetic in respect of which the offence has been, or is being, committed, not to dispose of any stock of such drug or cosmetic for a specified period not exceeding twenty days, or, unless the alleged offence is such that the defect may be removed by the possessor of the drug or cosmetic, seize the stock of such drug or cosmetic and any substance or article by means of which the offence has been, or is being, committed or which may be employed for the commission of such offence;]

[(cc) examine any record, register, document or any other material object found

[with any person, or in any place, vehicle, vessel or other conveyance referred to in clause (c)], and seize the same if he has reason to believe that it may furnish evidence of the commission of an offence punishable under this Act or the rules made thereunder;]

[(cca) require any person to produce any record, register, or other document relating to the manufacture for sale or for distribution, stocking, exhibition for sale, offer for sale or distribution of any drug or cosmetic in respect of which he has reason to believe that an offence under this Chapter has been, or is being, committed;]

(d) exercise such other powers as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Chapter or any rules made thereunder.

1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1962, s.17, for ―in the manufacture, import or sale of drugs‖ (w.e.f 27-7-1964).
2. Ins. by Act 68 of 1982, s.18 (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
3. Subs. by Act 11of 1955, s. 11, for s. 22.
4. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s.19, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

(2) The provisions of

[the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)] shall, so far as may be, apply to any search or seizure under this Chapter as they apply to any search or seizure made under the authority of a warrant issued under

[section 94] of the said Code.

[(2A) Every record, register or other document seized under clause (cc) or produced under clause (cca) shall be returned to the person, from whom they were seized or who produce the same, within a period of twenty days of the date of such seizure or production, as the case may be, after copies thereof or extracts therefrom certified by that person, in such manner as may be prescribed, have been taken.]

(3) If any person wilfully obstructs an Inspector in the exercise of the powers conferred upon him by or under this Chapter,

[or refuses to produce any record, register or other document when so required under clause (cca) of sub- section (1),] he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.]

23. Procedure of Inspectors.—(1) Where an Inspector takes any sample of a drug

[or cosmetic] under this Chapter, he shall tender the fair price thereof and may require a written acknowledgment therefor.

(2) Where the price tendered under sub-section (1) is refused, or where the Inspector seizes the stock of any drug

[or cosmetic] under clause (c) of section 22, he shall tender a receipt therefor in the prescribed form.
(3) Where an Inspector takes a sample of a drug

[or cosmetic] for the purpose of test or analysis, he shall intimate such purpose in writing in the prescribed form to the person from whom he takes it and, in the presence of such person unless he wilfully absents himself, shall divide the sample into four portions and effectively seal and suitably mark the same and permit such person to add his own seal and mark to all or any of the portions so sealed and marked:

Provided that where the sample is taken from premises whereon the drug

[or cosmetic] is being manufactured, it shall be necessary to divide the sample into three portions only:

Provided further that where the drug

[or cosmetic] is made up in containers of small volume, instead of dividing a sample as aforesaid, the Inspector may, and if the drug

[or cosmetic] be such that it is likely to deteriorate or be otherwise damaged by exposure shall, take three or four, as the case may be, of the said containers after suitably marking the same and, where necessary, sealing them.

(4) The Inspector shall restore one portion of a sample so divided or one container, as the case may be, to the person from whom he takes it, and shall retain the remainder and dispose of the same as follows:—

(i) one portion or container he shall forthwith send to the Government Analyst for test or analysis;

(ii) the second he shall produce to the Court before which proceedings, if any, are instituted in respect of the drug 3[or cosmetic];

4[(iii) the third, where taken, he shall send to the person, if any, whose name, address and other particulars have been disclosed under section 18A.]

(5) Where an Inspector takes any action under clause (c) of section 22,— (a) he shall use all despatch in ascertaining whether or not the drug

[or cosmetic] contravenes any of the provisions of the section 18 and, if it is ascertained that the drug

[or cosmetic] does not so contravene, forthwith revoke the order passed under the said clause or, as the case may be, take such action as may be necessary for the return of the stock seized;
(b) if he seizes the stock of the drug

[or cosmetic], he shall as soon as may be inform

[a Judicial Magistrate] and take his orders as to the custody thereof;
(c) without prejudice to the institution of any prosecution, if the alleged contravention be such that the defect may be remedied by the possessor of the drug

[or cosmetic], he shall, on being satisfied that the defect has been so remedied, forthwith revoke his order under the said clause.

1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s.19, for ―the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898‖ (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
2. Ins. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 19. (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
3. Ins.by Act 21 of 1962, s.15 (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).
4. Subs. by Act 13 of 1964, s.16, for cl. (iii) (w.e.f.15-9-1964).
5. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 20, for ―a Magistrate‖ (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

[(6) Where an Inspector seizes any record, register, document or any other material object under clause (cc) of sub- section (1) of section 22, he shall, as soon as may be, inform 2[a Judicial Magistrate] and take his orders as to the custody thereof.]
24. Persons bound to disclose place where drugs or cosmetics are manufactured or kept. —Every person for the time being in charge of any premises whereon any drug 3[or cosmetic] is being manufactured or is kept for sale or distribution shall, on being required by an Inspector so to do, be legally bound to disclose to the Inspector the place where the drug 3[or cosmetic] is being manufactured or is kept, as the case may be.
25. Reports of Government Analysts.—(1) The Government Analyst to whom a sample of any drug

[or cosmetic] has been submitted for test or analysis under sub-section (4) of section 23, shall deliver to the Inspector submitting it a signed report in triplicate in the prescribed form.
(2) The Inspector on receipt thereof shall deliver one copy of the report to the person from whom the sample was taken 4[and another copy to the person, if any, whose name, address and other particulars have been disclosed under section 18A], and shall retain the third copy for use in any prosecution in respect of the sample.
(3) Any document purporting to be a report signed by a Government Analyst under this Chapter shall be evidence to the facts stated therein, and such evidence shall be conclusive unless the person from whom the sample was taken

[or the person whose name, address and other particulars have been disclosed under section 18A] has, within twenty-eight days of the receipt of a copy of the report, notified in writing the Inspector or the Court before which any proceedings in respect of the sample are pending that he intends to adduce evidence in controversion of the report.
(4) Unless the sample has already been tested or analysed in the Central Drugs Laboratory, where a person has under sub-section (3) notified his intention of adducing evidence in controversion of a Government Analyst‘s report, the Court may, of its own motion or in its discretion at the request either of the complainant or the accused, cause the sample of the drug

[or cosmetic] produced before the Magistrate under subsection (4) of section 23 to be sent for test or analysis to the said Laboratory, which shall make the test or analysis and report in writing signed by, or under the authority of, the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory the result thereof, and such report shall be conclusive evidence of the facts stated therein.
(5) The cost of a test or analysis made by the Central Drugs Laboratory under sub-section (4) shall be paid by the complainant or accused as the Court shall direct.
26. Purchaser of drug 3[or cosmetic] enabled to obtain test or analysis.—Any person

[or any recognised consumer association, whether such person is a member of that association or not,] shall, on application in the prescribed manner and on payment of the prescribed fee, be entitled to submit for test or analysis to a Government Analyst any drug

[or cosmetic]

[purchased by him or it] and to receive a report of such test or analysis signed by the Government Analyst.

[Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 32, ―recognised consumer association‖ means a voluntary consumer association registered under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or any other law for the time being in force.]

[26A. Power of Central Government to prohibit manufacture, etc., of drug and cosmetic in public interest.— Without prejudice to any other provision contained in this Chapter, if the Central Government is satisfied, that the use of any drug or cosmetic is likely to involve any risk to human beings or animals or that any drug does not have the therapeutic value claimed or purported to be claimed for it or contains ingredients and in such quantity for which there is no therapeutic justification and that in the public interest it is necessary or expedient so to do, then, that Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 11[regulate, restrict or prohibit] the manufacture, sale or distribution of such drug or cosmetic.] 12[26B. Powers of Central Government to regulate or restrict, manufacture, etc., of drug in public interest. – Without prejudice to any other provision contained in this Chapter, if the Central Government is satisfied that a drug is essential to meet the requirements of an emergency arising due to epidemic or natural calamities and that in the public interest it is necessary or expedient so to do, then, that Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, regulate or restrict the manufacture, sale or distribution of such drug.]

[27. Penalty for manufacture, sale, etc., of drugs in contravention of this Chapter.—Whoever, himself or by any other person on his behalf, manufactures for sale or for distribution, or sells, or stocks or exhibits or offers for sale or distributes, —
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 1960, s. 6 (w.e.f. 16-3-1961). 9. Ins. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 21 (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
2. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 20, for ―a Magistrate‖ (w.e.f. 1-2-1983). 10. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982 s. 22, for s. 27 (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
3. Ins. by Act 21 of 1962, s. 15 (w.e.f. 27-7-1964). 11. Sub. by Act 26 of 2008, s 4, for ―prohibit‖ (w.e.f 10-8-2009).
4. Subs. by Act 13 of 1964, s. 17, for certain words (w.e.f. 15-9-1964). 12. Ins. by Act 26 of 2008, sec 5(w.e.f. 10-8-2009).
5. Subs. by Act 13 of 1964 s.17, for ―or the said warrantor‖(w.e.f. 15-9-1964).
7. Subs. by Act 71 of 1986 s. 2, for ―purchased by him‖ (w.e.f. 15-9-1987).
8. Added by Act 71 of 1986 s. 2, (w.e.f. 15-9-1987).

(a) any drug deemed to be adulterated under section 17A or spurious under section 1[17B and which] when used by any person for or in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation, or prevention of any disease or disorder is likely to cause his death or is likely to cause such harm on his body as would amount to grievous hurt within the meaning of section 320 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), solely on account of such drug being adulterated or spurious or not of standard quality, as the case may be, shall be 2[punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend to a term of life and with fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees or three times value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more;] 3[Provided that the fine imposed on and released from, the person convicted under this clause shall be paid, by way of compensation, to the person who had used the adulterated or spurious drugs referred to in this clause.
Provided further that where the use of the adulterated or spurious drugs referred to in this clause has caused the death of a person who used such drugs, the fine imposed on and realised from, the person convicted under this clause, shall be paid to the relative of the person who had died due to the use of the adulterated or spurious drugs referred to in this clause.
Explanation.—For the purposes of the second proviso, the expression "relative" means— (i) spouse of the deceased person; or (ii) a minor legitimate son, and unmarried legitimate daughter and a widowed mother; or (iii) parent of the minor victim; or (iv) if wholly dependent on the earnings of the deceased person at the time of his death, a son or a daughter who has attained the age of eighteen years; or (v) any person, if wholly or in part, dependent on the earnings of the deceased person at the time of this death,— (a) the parent; or (b) a minor brother or an unmarried sister; or (c) a widowed daughter-in-law; or (d) a widowed sister; or (e) a minor child of a pre-deceased son; or (f) a minor child of a pre-deceased daughter where no parent of the child is alive; or (g) the paternal grandparent if no parent of the member is alive.]

(b) any drug— (i) deemed to be adulterated under section 17A, but not being a drug referred to in clause (a), or (ii) without a valid licence as required under clause (c) of section 18, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall 4[not be less than three year but which may extend to five years and with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more]:
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of 5[less than three years and of fine of less than one lakh rupees];
(c) any drug deemed to be spurious under section 17B, but not being a drug referred to in clause (a) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall 6[not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and with fine which shall not be less than three lakh rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more]:
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special reasons, to be recorded in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of 7[less than seven years but not less than three years and of fine of less than one lakh rupees];
(d) any drug, other than a drug referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (c), in contravention of any other provision of this Chapter or any rule made thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to two years 8[and with fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees]:
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special reasons, to be recorded in the judgment impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than one year.
1. Sub. by Act 26 of 2008, s 6(i)(A), for ―17B or which‖ (w.e.f 10-8-2009).
2. Sub. by Act 26 of 2008, s 6(i)(B), for ―punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to a term of life and with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees;‖ (w.e.f 10-8-2009).
3. Ins. by Act 26 of 2008, s. 6(i)(C) (w.e.f.10-8-2009).
4. Sub. by Act 26 of 2008, s 6(ii)(A), for ―not be less than one year but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees;‖ (w.e.f 10-8-2009).
5. Sub. by Act 26 of 2008, s 6(ii)(B),for ―less than one year and of fine of less than five thousand rupees;‖ (w.e.f 10-8-2009).
6. Sub. by Act 26 of 2008, s 6(iii)(A),(w.e.f 10-8-2009).
7. Sub. by Act 26 of 2008, s 6(iii)(B),(w.e.f 10-8-2009). 8. Sub. by Act 26 of 2008, s 6(iv), for ―and with fine‖ (w.e.f 10-8-2009).

8[27A. Penalty for manufacture, sale, etc., of cosmetics in contravention of this Chapter.—Whoever himself or by any other person on his behalf manufactures for sale or for distribution, or sells, or stocks or exhibits or offers for sale— 9[(i) any cosmetic deemed to be spurious under section 17D or adulterated under section 17E shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees or three times to value of the cosmetics confiscated, whichever is more;
(ii) any cosmetic other than a cosmetic referred to in clause (i) in contravention of any provisions of this Chapter or any rule made thereunder shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with both.]

1[28. Penalty for non-disclosure of the name of the manufacturer, etc.—Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 18A 2[or section 24] shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or 3[with fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees or with both.]

4[28A. Penalty for not keeping documents, etc., and for non-disclosure of information.—Whoever without reasonable cause or excuse, contravenes the provisions of section 18B shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or 12[with fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees or with both].

28B. Penalty for manufacture, etc., of drugs or cosmetics in contravention of section 26A.—Whoever himself or by any other person on his behalf manufactures or sells or distributes any drug or cosmetic in contravention of the provisions of any notification issued under section 26A, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.]

29. Penalty for use of Government Analyst‘s report for advertising.—Whoever uses any report of a test or analysis made by the Central Drugs Laboratory or by a Government Analyst, or any extract from such report, for the purpose of advertising any drug 5[or cosmetic], shall be punishable with fine, which may extend to five hundred rupees.

6[30. Penalty for subsequent offences.— 7[(1) Whoever having been convicted of an offence— (a) Under clause (b) of section 27, is again convicted of an offence under that clause, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be 1 0[less than seven years but which may extend to ten years and with fine which shall not be less than two lakh rupees];
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of 11[less than seven years and of fine of less than one lakh rupees];

1. Subs. by Act 13 of 1964, s.19, for s. 28 (w.e.f.15-9-1964).
3. Subs. by Act 26 of 2008 s. 7. Earlier Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s.23.
4. Ins. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 24, (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
5. Ins. by Act 21 of 1962, s. 15 (w.e.f.27-7-1964).
6. Subs. by Act 11 of 1955, s. 14, for s. 30.
8. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982 s. 22, for s. 27A (w.e.f. 1-2-1983), Earlier s. 27A was inserted by Act 21 of 1962, s 19 (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).
9. Subs. by Act 26 of 2008 s. 7, for clause (i) and (ii) (w.e.f. 10-8-2009).
10. Subs. by Act 26 of 2008 sec. 11(a)(i)(A), for ―less than two years but which may extend to six years and with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees‖;( w.e.f. 10-8-2009)
11. Subs. by Act 26 of 2008 sec. 11(a)(i)(B), for ―less than two years and of fine of less than ten thousand rupees‖; (w.e.f. 10-8-2009).
12. Subs. by Act 26 of 2008 s. 7, for ―with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both‖ (w.e.f. 10-8-2009).

(b) under clause (c) of section 27 is again convicted of an offence under that clause, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall 1 2[less than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and with fine which shall not be less than three lakh rupees];

(c) under clause (d) of section 27, is again convicted of an offence under that clause shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years but which may extend to four years or with fine which shall not be less than 13[fifty thousand rupees], or with both.]

1[(1A) Whoever, having been convicted of an offence under section 27A is again convicted under that section, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to 2[two thousand rupees], or with both.]

(2) Whoever, having been convicted of an offence under 3[* * *] section 29 is again convicted of an offence under the same section shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to 4[two tears, or with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees], or with both.]

31. Confiscation.—

[(1)] Where any person has been convicted under this Chapter for contravening any such provision of this Chapter or any rule made thereunder as may be specified by rule made in this behalf, the stock of the drug

[or cosmetic] in respect of which the contravention has been made shall be liable to confiscation

[and if such contravention is in respect of—

[(i) manufacture of any drug deemed to be misbranded under section 17, adulterated under section 17A or spurious under section 17B; or

(ii)

[manufacture for sale, or for distribution, sale, or stocking or exhibiting or offering for sale,] or distribution of any drug without a valid licence as required under clause (c) of section 18;

any implements or machinery used in such manufacture, sale or distribution and any receptacles, packages or coverings in which such drug is contained and the animals, vehicles, vessels or other conveyances used in carrying such drug shall also be liable to confiscation.]

[(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1) where the Court is satisfied, on the application of an Inspector or otherwise and after such inquiry as may be necessary that the drug or cosmetic is not of standard quality or is a

[misbranded, adulterated or spurious drug or misbranded or spurious cosmetic,] such drug or, as the case may be, such cosmetic shall be liable to confiscation.]

[31A. Application of provisions to Government departments.—The provisions of this Chapter except those contained in section 31 shall apply in relation to the manufacture, sale or distribution of drugs of any department of Government as they apply in relation to the manufacture, sale or distribution of drugs by any other person.]

32. Cognizance of offence.—14[(1) No prosecution under this Chapter shall be instituted except by2. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 25, for ―one thousand rupees‖ (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
3. The words and figures ―section 28 or‖ omitted by Act 13 of 1964, s. 26 (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).
4. Subs. by Act 26 of 2008 sec. 11(b), for ―ten years, or with fine, or with both‖.
5. S. 31 re-numbered as sub-section (1) by Act 35 of 1960, s. 9 (w.e.f. 16-3-1961).
8. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 26, for cl. (i) (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
9. Subs. by s. 26, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
10. Sub-section (2) ins. by Act 35 of 1960, s. 9 and subs. by Act 21 of 1962, s. 21 (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).
11. Ins. by Act 13 of 1964, s. 22 (w.e.f.15-9-1964).
12. Subs. by Act 26 of 2008 sec. 11(a)(ii), for ―less than six years but which may extend to ten years and with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees ‖;( w.e.f. 10-8-2009)
13. Subs. by Act 26 of 2008 sec. 11(a)(iii), for ―five thousand rupees ‖; (w.e.f. 10-8-2009)
14. Subs. by Act 26 of 2008, sec 12, for sub-section (1) and (2) (w.e.f. 10-8-2009)

(a) an Inspector, or (b) any gazetted Officer of the Central Government or a State Government authorized in writing in this behalf by the Central Government or a State Government by a general or special order made in this behalf by that Government; or (c) the person aggrieved; or (d) a recognised consumer association whether such person is a member of that association or not.

(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no court inferior to that of a Court of Sessions shall try an offence punishable under this Chapter.]

(3) Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be deemed to prevent any person from being prosecuted under any other law for any act or omission which constitutes an offence against this Chapter.

[32A. Power of Court to implead the manufacturer, etc.—Where, at any time during the trial of any offence under this Chapter alleged to have been committed by any person, not being the manufacturer of a drug or cosmetic or his agent for the distribution thereof, the Court is satisfied, on the evidence adduced before it, that such manufacturer or agent is also concerned in that offence, then, the Court may, notwithstanding anything contained

[in sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) of section 319 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,1973 (2 of 1974)] proceed against him as though a prosecution had been instituted against him under section 32.]

3[32B. Compounding of certain offences.- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), any offence punishable under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 13, Section 28 and Section 28A of this Act(whether committed by a company or any officer thereof), not being an offence punishable with imprisonment only, or with imprisonment and also with fine, may, either before or after the instructions of any prosecution, be compounded by the Central Government or by any State Government or any officer authorized in this behalf Central Government or a State Government, on payment for credit to that Government of such sum as that Government may, by rules made in this behalf, specify:

Provided that such sum shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum amount of the fine which may be imposed under this Act for the offences so compounded:
Provided further that in cases of subsequent offences, the same shall not be compoundable.

(2) When the accused has been committed for trial or when he has been convicted and an appeal is pending, no composition for the offences shall be allowed without the leave of the court to which he is committed or, as the case may be, before which the appeal is to be heard.

(3) Where an offence is compounded under sub-section (1), no proccding or further proceeding, as the case may be , shall be taken against the offender in respect of the offences so compounded and the offender, if in custody, shall be released forthwith.]

33. Power of Central Government to make rules.—

[(1) The Central Government may

[after consultation with, or on the recommendation of, the Board] and after previous publication by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Chapter:

Provided that consultation with the Board may be dispensed with if the Central Government is of opinion that circumstances have arisen which render it necessary to make rules without such consultation, but in such a case the Board shall be consulted within six months of the making of the rules and the Central Government shall take into consideration any suggestions which the Board may make in relation to the amendment of the said rules.]

1. Ins. by Act 13 of 1964, s. 23 (w.e.f.15-9-1964).
3. Ins. by Act 26 of 2008, s. 13; (w.e.f. 10-8-2009)
4. Subs. by Act 11 of 1955, s. 15, for sub-section (1).

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may—

(a) provide for the establishment of laboratories for testing and analysing drugs

[or cosmetics];

(b) prescribed the qualifications and duties of Government Analysts and the qualifications of Inspectors;

(c) prescribe the methods of test or analysis to be employed in determining whether a drug

[or cosmetic] is of standard quality;

(d) prescribe, in respect of biological and organometallic compounds, the units or methods of standardisation;

[(dd) prescribe under clause (d) of

[section 17A] the colour or colours which a drug may bear or contain for purposes of colouring;]

4[(dda) prescribe under clause (d) of section 17E the colour or colours which a cosmetic may bear or contain for purposes of colouring];
(e) prescribe the forms of licences

[for the manufacture for sale or for distribution], for the sale and for the distribution of drugs or any specified drug or class of drugs

[or of cosmetics or any specified cosmetic or class of cosmetics], the form of application for such licences, the conditions subject to which such licences may be issued, the authority empowered to issue the same

[, the qualification of such authority] and the fees payable therefor

[and provide for the cancellation or suspension of such licences in any case where any provision of this Chapter or the rules made thereunder is contravened or any of the conditions subject to which they are issued is not complied with;]

[(ee) prescribe the records, registers or other documents to be kept and maintained under section 18B;

(eea) prescribe the fees for the inspection (for the purposes of grant or renewal of licence) of premises, wherein any drug or cosmetic is being or is proposed to be manufactured;

(eeb) prescribe the manner in which copies are to be certified under sub-section (2A) of section 22;]

(f) specify the diseases or ailments which a drug may not purport or claim

[to prevent, cure or mitigate] and such other effects which a drug may not purport or claim to have;

(g) prescribe the conditions subject to which small quantities of drugs may be manufactured for the purpose of examination, test or analysis;

3. Ins. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 29 ( w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
4. Ins. by Act 26 of 2008, s. 14(i) (w.e.f. 10-8-2009)
5. Subs. by Act 11 of 1955, s. 15, for ―to cure or mitigate‖.
6. Subs. By Act 68 of 1982, s. 29 ( w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

(h) require the date of manufacture and the date of expiry of potency to be clearly or truly stated on the label or container of any specified drug or class of drugs, and prohibit the sale, stocking or exhibition for sale, or distribution of the said drug or class of drugs after the expiry of a specified period from the date of manufacture or after the expiry of the date of potency;
(i) prescribe the conditions to be observed in the packing in bottles, packages, and other containers of drugs

[or cosmetics],

[including the use of packing material which comes into direct contact with the drugs] and prohibit the sale, stocking or exhibition for sale, or distribution of drugs

[or cosmetics] packed in contravention of such conditions;
(j) regulate the mode of labelling packed drugs 1[or cosmetics], and prescribe the matter which shall or shall not be included in such labels;
(k) prescribe the maximum proportion of any poisonous substance which may be added or contained in any drug, prohibit the manufacture, sale or stocking or exhibition for sale, or distribution of any drug in which that proportion is exceeded, and specify substances which shall be deemed to be poisonous for the purposes of this Chapter and the rules made thereunder;
(l) require that the accepted scientific name of any specified drug shall be displayed in the prescribed manner on the label or wrapper of any patent or proprietary medicine containing such drug;

[****]

[(n) prescribe the powers and duties of Inspectors

[and the qualifications of the authority to which such Inspectors shall be subordinate] and

[specify the drugs or classes of drugs or cosmetics or classes of cosmetics] in relation to which and the conditions, limitations or restrictions subject to which, such powers and duties may be exercised or performed;] (o) prescribe the forms of report to be given by Government Analysts, and the manner of application for test or analysis under section 26 and the fees payable therefor;

[(p) specify the offences against this Chapter or any rule made thereunder in relation to which an order of confiscation may be made under section 31; 8[****]] (q) provide for the exemption, conditionally or otherwise, from all or any of the provisions of this Chapter or the rules made thereunder, of any specified drug or class of drugs 1[or cosmetic or class of cosmetics]; 9[and] 10[(r) sum which may be specified by the Central Government under section 32-B.] 11[****]

12[33A. Chapter not to apply to 13[Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drugs.—Save as otherwise provided in this Act, nothing contained in this Chapter shall apply to 13[Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drugs.]

[CHAPTER IVA
PROVISIONS RELATING TO

[AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA AND UNANI] DRUGS

33B. Application of Chapter IVA.—This Chapter shall apply only to

[Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani] drugs.

33C.

[Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board].—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette and with effect from such date as may be specified therein, constitute a Board (to be called the

[Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board]) to advise the Central Government and the State Governments on technical matters arising out of this Chapter and to carry out the other functions assigned to it by this Chapter.

(2) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:—

3. Cl. (m) omitted by Act 13 of 1964, s. 24 (w.e.f. 15-9-1965).
4. Subs. by Act 35 of 1960, s. 10, for cl. (n) (w.e.f. 16-3-1961).
6. Subs. by Act 21 of 1962, s. 22, for ―the drugs or class of drugs‖ (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).
7. Subs. by Act 13 of 1964, s. 24, for cl. (p) (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).
8. The word ―and‖omitted by Act 26 of 2008, sec. 14(ii) (w.e.f. 10-8-2009)
9. Ins. by Act 26 of 2008, Sec. 14 (iii) (w.e.f. 10-8-2009)
10. Ins. by Act 26 of 2008, Sec. 14 (iv) (w.e.f. 10-8-2009)
11. Sub-section (3) ins. by Act 35 of 1960 and omitted by Act 13 of 1964, s. 24 (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).
13. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 2, for ―AYURVEDIC (INCLUDING SIDDHA) OR UNANI‖ (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

(i) the Director General of Health Services, ex officio;

(ii) the Drugs Controller, India, ex officio;

1[(iii) the principal officer dealing with Indian systems of medicine in the Ministry of Health, ex officio;] (iv) the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory, Calcutta, ex officio;
(v) one person holding the appointment of Government Analyst under section 33F, to be nominated by the Central Government;

(vi) one Pharmacognocist to be nominated by the Central Government;
(vii) one Phyto-chemist to be nominated by the Central Government;
2[(viii) four persons to be nominated by the Central Government, two from amongst the members of the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee, one from amongst the members of the Unani Pharmacopoeia Committee and one from amongst the members of the Siddha Pharmacopoeia Committee;]

(ix) one teacher in Dravyaguna and Bhaishajya Kalpana, to be nominated by the Central Government;

(x) one teacher in ILM-UL-ADVIA and TAKLIS-WA-DAWA-SAZI, to be nominated by the Central Government;

3[(xi) one teacher in Gunapadam, to be nominated by the Central Government;

(xii) three persons, one each to represent the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drug industry, to be nominated by the Central Government;

(xiii) three persons, one each from among the practitioners of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Tibb system of medicine, to be nominated by the Central Government.]

(3) The Central Government shall appoint a member of the Board as its Chairman.

(4) The nominated members of the Board shall hold office for three years but shall be eligible for renomination.

(5) The Board may, subject to the previous approval of the Central Government, make bye-laws fixing a quorum and regulating its own procedure and conduct of all business to be transacted by it.

(6) The functions of the Board may be exercised notwithstanding any vacancy therein.

(7) The Central Government shall appoint a person to be Secretary of the Board and shall provide the Board with such clerical and other staff as the Central Government considers necessary.

4[33D. The Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative Committee.—(1) The Central Government may constitute an Advisory Committee to be called the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative Committee to advise the Central Government, the State Governments and the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board on any matter for the purpose of securing uniformity throughout India in the administration of this Act in so far as it relates to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs.

(2) The Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative Committee shall consist of two persons to be nominated by the Central Government as representatives of that Government and not more than one representative of each State to be nominated by the State Government concerned.

(3) The Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative Committee shall meet when required to do so by the Central Government and shall regulate its own procedure.

33E. Misbranded drugs.—For the purposes of this Chapter, an Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs shall be deemed to be misbranded—

1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 30, for cl. (iii) (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
2. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 30, for cl. (viii) (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
3. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 30, for cls. (xi) and (xii) (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
4. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 31, for ss. 33D and 33E (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

(a) if it is so coloured, coated, powered or polished that damage is concealed, or if it is made to appear of better or greater therapeutic value than it really is; or

(b) if it is not labelled in the prescribed manner; or

(c) if its label or container or anything accompanying the drug bears any statement, design or device which makes any false claim for the drug or which is false or misleading in any particular.

33EE. Adulterated drugs.—For the purposes of this Chapter, an Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug shall be deemed to be adulterated,—

(a) if it consists, in whole or in part, of any filthy, putrid or decomposed substance; or

(b) if it has been prepared, packed or stored under insanitary conditions whereby it may have been contaminated with filth or whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health; or

(c) if its container is composed, in whole or in part, of any poisonous or deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to health; or

(d) if it bears or contains, for purposes of coloring only, a colour other than one which is prescribed; or

(e) if it contains any harmful or toxic substance which may render it injurious to health; or

(f) if any substance has been mixed therewith so as to reduce its quality or strength.

Explanation.—For the purpose of clause (a), a drug shall not be deemed to consist, in whole or in part, of any decomposed substance only by reason of the fact that such decomposed substance is the result of any natural decomposition of the drug:

Provided that such decomposition is not due to any negligence on the part of the manufacturer of the drug or the dealer thereof and that it does not render the drug injurious to health.

33EEA. Spurious drugs.—For the purposes of this Chapter, an Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug shall be deemed to be spurious—

(a) if it is sold, or offered or exhibited for sale, under a name which belongs to another drug; or

(b) if it is an imitation of, or is a substitute for, another drug or resembles another drug in a manner likely to deceive, or bears upon it or upon its label or container the name of another drug, unless it is plainly and conspicuously marked so as to reveal its true character and its lack of identity with such other drug; or

(c) if the label or container bears the name of an individual or company purporting to be the manufacturer of the drug, which individual or company is fictitious or does not exist; or

(d) if it has been substituted wholly or in part by any other drug or substance; or

(e) if it purports to be the product of a manufacturer of whom it is not truly a product.

33EEB. Regulation of manufacture for sale of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs.—No person shall manufacture for sale or for distribution any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug except in accordance with such standards, if any, as may be prescribed in relation to that drug.

33EEC. Prohibition of manufacture and sale of certain Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drug.—From such date as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, no person, either by himself or by any other person on his behalf, shall—

(a) manufacture for sale or for distribution—

(i) any misbranded, adulterated or spurious Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs;

(ii) any patent or proprietary medicine, unless there is displayed in the prescribed manner on the label or container thereof the true list of all the ingredients contained in it; and

(iii) any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug in contravention of any of the provisions of this Chapter or any rule made thereunder;

(b) sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale or distribute, any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug which has been manufactured in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act, or any rule made thereunder;

(c) manufacture for sale or for distribution, any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug, except under, and in accordance with the conditions of, a licence issued for such purpose under this Chapter by the prescribed authority:

Provided that nothing in this section apply to Vaidyas and Hakims who manufacture Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug for the use of their own patients:

Provided further that nothing in this section shall apply to the manufacture, subject to the prescribed conditions, of small quantities of any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug for the purpose of examination, test or analysis.

33EED. Power of Central Government to prohibit manufacture, etc., of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs in public interest.—Without prejudice to any other provision contained in this Chapter, if the Central Government is satisfied on the basis of any evidence or other material available before it that the use of any Ayruvedic, Siddha or Unani drug is likely to involve any risk to human beings or animals or that any such drug does not have the therapeutic value claimed or purported to be claimed for it and that in the public interest it is necessary or expedient so to do then, that Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, prohibit the manufacture, sale or distribution of such drug.]

33F. Government Analysts.—(1) The Central Government or a State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Government Analysts for such areas as may be assigned to them by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), neither the Central Government nor a State Government shall appoint as a Government Analyst any official not serving under it without the previous consent of the Government under which he is serving.

1[(3) No person who has any financial interest in the manufacture or sale of any drug shall be appointed to be a Government Analyst under this section.]

33G. Inspectors.—(1) The Central Government or a State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Inspectors for such areas as may be assigned to them by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be.

(2) The powers which may be exercised by an Inspector and the duties which may be performed by him and the conditions, limitations or restrictions subject to which such powers and duties may be exercised or performed shall be such as may be prescribed.

(3) No person who has any financial interest in the manufacture or sale of any drug shall be appointed to be an Inspector under this section.

(4) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and shall be officially subordinate to such authority as the Government appointing him may specify in this behalf.

33H. Application of provisions of sections 22, 23, 24 and 25.—The provisions of sections 22, 23, 24 and 25 and the rules, if any, made thereunder shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to an Inspector and a Government Analyst appointed under this Chapter as they apply in relation to an Inspector and a Government Analyst appointed under Chapter IV, subject to the modification that the references to ―drug‖ in the said section, shall be construed as references to 2[―Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drugs‖.

3[33-I. Penalty for manufacture, sale, etc., of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug in contravention of this Chapter —Whoever himself or by any other person on his behalf—

(1) manufactures for sale or for distribution,—

1. Ins. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 32 (w.e.f.1-2-1983).
3. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 33, for ss. 33-I and 33J (w.e.f.1-2-1983).

1[(a) Any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug – (i) deemed to be misbranded under section 33E, (ii) deemed to be adulterated under section 33EE, or (ii) without a valid licence as required under clause (c) of section 33EEC, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and with fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more;]

(b) any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug deemed to be spurious under section 33EEA, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than 2[fifty thousand rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more]:

Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than one year and of fine of less than 2[fifty thousand rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more]; or

3[(c) any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug in contravention of the provisions of any notifications issuedunder Section 33-EED shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more.]

(2) contravenes any other provisions of this Chapter or of section 24 as applied by section 33H or any rule made under this Chapter, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 4[six months and with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees.]

5[33J. Penalty for subsequent offences.—Whoever having being convicted of an offence,—

(a) under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 33-I is again convicted of an offence under that clause, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and with fine which shall not be less than 6[fifty thousand rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more];

(b) under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 33-I is again convicted of an offence under that clause, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years but which may extend to six years and with fine which shall not be less than 7[one lakh rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more:]

Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than two years and of fine of less than 7[one lakh rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more;]

1. Sub. by s. 15(a)(i), for clause (a) (w.e.f. 10.08.2008). Clause (a), before substitution, stood as:―(a) Any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug – (i) deemed to be adulterated under section 33EE, or (ii) without a valid licence as required under clause (c) of section 33EEC, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and with fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees;‖
2. Sub. by Act 26 of 2008, s. 15(a)(ii), for ―five thousand rupees‖ (w.e.f. 10.08.2008)
3. Ins. by Act 26 of 2008, s. 15(a)(iii) (w.e.f. 10.08.2008)
4. Sub. by Act 26 of 2008, s. 15(b) for ―three months and with fine which shall not be less than five hundred rupees.‖ (w.e.f. 10.08.2008)
5. Sub by Act 68 of 1982,s.33 for section 33J(w.e.f. 01.02.1983)
6. Sub. by Act 26 of 2008, s. 16(a), for ―two thousand rupees‖ (w.e.f. 10.08.2008)
7. Sub. by Act 26 of 2008, s. 16(b), for ―five thousand rupees‖ (w.e.f. 10.08.2008)

(c) under sub-section (2) of section 33-I is again convicted of an offence under that sub-section, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 5[one year and with fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more;]

33K. Confiscation.—Where any person has been convicted under this Chapter, the stock of the 1[Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drug, in respect of which the contravention has been made, shall be liable to confiscation.

6[33-KA. Disclosure of name of manufacturer etc., –Every person, not being the manufacturer of any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug or his agent for the distribution thereof, shall, if so required, disclose to the Inspector the name, address and other particulars of the person from whom he acquired the Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug.]

6[33-KB. Maintenance of records and furnishing of information.— Every person holding a licence under clause (c) of section 33-EEC shall keep and maintain such records, registers and other documents as may be prescribed and shall furnish to any officer or authority exercising any power or discharging any function under this Act such information as is required by such officer or authority for carrying out the purposes of this Act. ]

33L. Application of provisions to Government departments.—The provisions of this Chapter except those contained in section 33K shall apply in relation to the manufacture for sale, sale or distribution of any

[Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drug by any department of Government as they apply in relation to the manufacture for sale, sale or distribution of such drug by any other person.

33M. Cognizance of offences.—(1) No prosecution under this Chapter shall be instituted except by an Inspector 2[with the previous sanction of the authority specified under sub-section (4) of section 33G].

(2) No Court inferior to that

[of a Metropolitan Magistrate or of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class] shall try an offence punishable under this Chapter.

33N. Power of Central Government to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may,

[after consultation with, or on the recommendation of, the Board] and after previous publication by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Chapter:

Provided that consultation with the Board may be dispensed with if the Central Government is of opinion that circumstances have arisen which render it necessary to make rules without such consultation, but in such a case, the Board shall be consulted within six months of the making of the rules and the Central Government shall take into consideration any suggestions which the Board may make in relation to the amendment of the said rules.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may— (a) provide for the establishment of laboratories for testing and analysing 1[Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drugs;

1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 2, for ―Ayurvedic (including Siddha) and Unani‖ (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
2. Ins. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 34, (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
4. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982 , s. 35, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
5. Sub. by Act 26 of 2008, s. 16(c), for ―six months and with fine which shall not be less than one thousand rupees.‖ (w.e.f. 10.08.2008)
6. Ins. by Act 26 of 2008, s. 17, (w.e.f. 10.08.2008).

(b) prescribe the qualification and duties of Government Analysts and the qualifications of Inspectors;

(c) prescribe the methods of test or analysis to be employed in determining whether any 1[Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drug is labelled with the true list of the ingredients which it is purported to contain;
(d) specify any substance as a poisonous substance;
(e) prescribe the forms of licences for the manufacture for sale of 1[Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drugs,2[and for sale of processed Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs,] the form of application for such licences, the conditions subject to which such licences may be issued, the authority empowered to issue the same and the fees payable therefor; 2[and provide for the cancellation or suspension of such licences in any case where any provision of this Chapter or rules made thereunder is contravened or any of the conditions subject to which they are issued is not complied with];

3[(f) prescribe the conditions to be observed in the packing of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs including the use of packing material which comes into direct contact with the drugs, regulate the mode of labelling packed drugs and prescribe the matters which shall or shall not be included in such labels;]

(g) prescribe the conditions subject to which small quantities of 1[Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drugs may be manufactured for the purpose of examination, test or analysis;

2[(gg) prescribe under clause (d) of section 33EE the colour or colours which an Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug may bear or contain for purposes of colouring;

(gga) prescribe the standards for Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs under section 33EEB 7[***];]

8[(ggb) prescribe the records, registers or other documents to be kept and maintained under section 33 KB; and]

(h) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed under this Chapter.

33-O. Power to amend First Schedule.—The Central Government, after consultation with the Board and after giving, by notification in the Official Gazette, not less than three months‘ notice of its intention so to do, may, by a like notification, add to or otherwise amend the First Schedule for the purposes of this Chapter and thereupon the said Schedule shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.]

4[CHAPTER V MISCELLANEOUS 5[6[33P.] Power to give directions.—The Central Government may give such directions to any State Government as may appear to the Central Government to be necessary for carrying into execution in the State any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder.]

34. Offences by companies.—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:

2. Ins. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 35, (w.e.f. 1-2-1968).
3. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 35, for cl. (f) (w.e.f. 1-2-1968).
4. Subs. by Act 11 of 1955, s. 16, for Chapter V.
5.. Ins. by Act 35 of 1960, s. 11 (w.e.f. 16-3-1961).
6. S. 33A re-numbered as s. 33P by Act 13 of 1964, s. 27 (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).
7. The word ―and‖ omitted by Act 26 of 2008, sec.18(i) (w.e.f. 10.08.2009)
8. Sub. by Act 26 of 2008, s. 18(ii) (w.e.f. 10.08.2009)

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section—

(a) ―company‖ means a body corporate, and includes a firm or other association of individuals; and

(b) ―director‖ in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.

1[34A. Offences by Government Departments.—Where an offence under Chapter 1V or Chapter 1VA has been committed by any department of Government, such authority as is specified by the Central Government to be in charge of manufacture, sale or distribution of drugs or where no authority is specified, the head of the department, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:

Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render any such authority or person liable to any punishment provided in Chapter 1V or Chapter 1VA, as the case may be, if such authority or person proves that the offence was committed without its or his knowledge or that such authority or person exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.]

2[34AA. Penalty for vexatious search or seizure.—Any Inspector exercising powers under this Act or the rules made thereunder, who,—

(a) without reasonable ground of suspicion searches any place, vehicle, vessel or other conveyance; or

(b) vexatiously and unnecessarily searches any person; or

(c) vexatiously and unnecessarily seizes any drug or cosmetic, or any substance or article, or any record, register, document or other material object; or

(d) commits, as such Inspector, any other act, to the injury of any person without having reason to believe that such act is required for the execution of his duty,

shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.]

35. Publication of sentences passed under this Act.— (1) If any person is convicted of an offence under this Act, 3[the Court before which the conviction takes place shall, on application made to it by the Inspector, cause] the offender‘s name, place of residence, the offence of which he has been convicted and the penalty which has been inflicted upon him, to be published at the expense of such person in such newspapers or in such other manner as the Court may direct.

(2) The expenses of such publication shall be deemed to form part of the cost relating to the conviction and shall be recoverable in the same manner as those costs are recoverable.

36. Magistrate‘s power to impose enhanced penalties.—Notwithstanding anything contained in 4[***] 5[the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)] it shall be lawful for 6[any Metropolitan Magistrate or any Judicial Magistrate of the first class] to pass any sentence authorised by this Act in excess of his powers under 4[* * *] the said Code.

7[36A. Certain offences to be tried summarily.—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), 8[all offences except the offences triable by the Special Court under Section 36-AB or Court of Sessions under this Act,] punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years, other than an offence under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 33-I, shall be tried in a summary way by a Judicial Magistrate of the first class specially empowered in this behalf by the State Government or by a Metropolitan Magistrate and the provisions of sections 262 to 265 (both inclusive) of the said Code shall, as far as may be, apply to such trial:

Provided that, in the case of any conviction in a summary trial under this section, it shall be lawful for the Magistrate to pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year:

Provided further that when at the commencement of, or in the course of, a summary trial under this section it appears to the Magistrate that the nature of the case is such that a sentence of imprisonment for a term exceeding one year may have to be passed or that it is, for any other reason, undesirable to try the case summarily, the Magistrate shall, after hearing the parties, record an order to that effect and thereafter recall any witness who has been examined and proceed to hear or rehear the case in the manner provided by the said Code.]

4. The words and figures ―section 32 of‖ omitted by Act 13 of 1964, s. 29 (w.e.f.15-9-1964).
5. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 38, for ―the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898‖ (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
7. Ins. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 38, (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
8. Sub. by Act 26 of 2008, s. 19 for all offences (w.e.f. 10.08.2009)

3[36-AB. Special Courts. – (1) The Central Government, or the State Government, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court, shall, for trial of offences relating to adulterated drugs or spurious drugs punishable under clause (a) and (b) of Section 13, sub-section (3) of Section 22, clause (a) and (c) of Section 27, Section 28, Section 28-A, Section 28-B and clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 30 and other offences relating to adulterated drugs or spurious drugs, by notification, designate one or more Courts of Sessions as a Special Court or Special Courts for such area or for such case or class or group of cases as may be specified in the notification.
Explanation.- In this sub-section, ―High Court‖ means the High Court of the State in which a Court of Sessions designated as Special Court was functioning immediately before such designation.
(2) While trying an offence under this Act, a Special Court shall also try an offence, other than an offence referred to in sub-section (1), with which the accused may, under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), be charged at the same trial.] 3[36-AC. Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable in certain cases. – (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)- (a) every offence, relating to adulterated or spurious drug and punishable under clause (a) and (c) of subsection (1) Section 13, clause (a) of sub-section (2) of Section 13, subsection (3) of Section 22, clause (a) and (c) of Section 27, Section 28, Section 28A, 40 Section 28B and sub-section (1) and (2) of Section 30 and other offences relating to adulterated drugs or spurious drugs, shall be cognizable.
(b) no person accused, of an offence punishable under clause (a) and (c) of sub-section (1) of Section 13, clause (a) of sub-section (2) of Section 13, sub-section (3) of Section 22, clause (a) and (c) of Section 27, Section 28, Section 28A, Section 28B and subsection (1) and (2) of Section 30 and other offences relating to adulterated drugs or spurious drugs, shall be released on bail or on his own bond unless- (i) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the application for such release; and (ii) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail:
Provided that a person, who, is under the age of sixteen years,or is a woman or is sick or infirm, may be released on bail, if the Special Court so directs.
(2) The limitation on granting of bail specified in clause (b) of sub-section (1) is in addition to the limitations under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or any other law for the time being in force on granting bail.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the Special powers of the High Court regarding bail under Section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) and the High Court may exercise such powers including the power under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of that section as if the reference to ―Magistrate‖ in that section includes also a reference to ―Special Court‖ designated under Section 36AB.] 3[36-AD. Application Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to proceedings before Special Courts. – (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) (including the provisions as to bails and bonds), shall apply to the proceedings before a Special Courts and for the purpose of said provisions, the Special Court shall be deemed to be a Court of Sessions and the person conducting the prosecution before the Special Court, shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor:
Provided that the Central Government or the State Government may also appoint, for any case or cases or group of cases, a Special Public Prosecutor.
(2) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed as Public Prosecutor or a Special Public Prosecutor under this section unless he has been in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years, under the Union or a State, requiring special knowledge of law.
(3) Every person appointed as a Public Prosecutor or a Special Public Prosecutor under this section shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within the meaning of clause (u) of 41 Section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) and the provisions of that Code shall have effect accordingly.] 3[36AE. Appeal and revision.- The High Court may exercise, so far as may be applicable, all the powers conferred by Chapter XXIX or Chapter XXX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973(2 of 1974), on a High Court, as if a Special Court within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court were a Court of Session trying cases within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court.]
37. Protection of action taken in good faith.—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.
1[38. Rules to be laid before Parliament.— Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 2[and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified from or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]

3. Ins. by Act 26 of 2008, s. 20 (w.e.f. 10.08.2009)

1[THE FIRST SCHEDULE [See section 3(a)] 2[A.—AYURVEDIC AND SIDDHA SYSTEMS]

Serial No. Name of book

Ayurveda

1. Arogya Kalpadruma
2. Arka Prakasha
3. Arya Bhishak
4. Ashtanga Hridaya
5. Ashtanga Samgraha
6. Ayurveda Kalpadruma
7. Ayurveda Prakasha
8. Ayurveda Samgraha
9. Bhaishajya Ratnavali
10. Brihat Bhaishajya Ratnakara
11. Bhava Prakasha
12. Brihat Nighantu Ratnakara
13. Charaka Samihita
14. Chakra Datta
15. Gada Nigraha
16. Kupi Pakva Rasayana
17. Nighantu Ratnakara
18. Rasa Chandanshu
19. Rasa Raja Sundara
20. Rasaratna Samuchaya
21. 3[Rasatantra Sara Va Siddha Prayoga Sangraha—Part 1] 4[21 (a) Rasatantra Sara Va Siddha Prayoga Sangraha—Part II (Edition 2006)]
22. Rasa Tarangini
23. Rasa Yoga Sagara
24. Rasa Yoga Ratnakara
25. Rasa Yoga Samgraha
26. Rasendra Sara Samgraha
27. Rasa Pradipika
28. Sahasrayoga
29. Sarvaroga Chikitsa Ratnam
30. Sarvayoga Chikitsa Ratnam
31. Sharangadhara Samhita
32. Siddha Bhaishajya Manimala
33. Siddha Yoga Samgraha
34. Sushruta Samhita
35. Vaidya Chintamani
36. Vaidyaka Shabda Sindu
37. Vaidyaka Chikitsa Sara
38. Vidya Jiwan
39. Vasava Rajeeyam
40. Yoga Ratnakara
41. Yoga Tarangini
42. Yoga Chintamani
43. Kashyapasamhita
44. Bhelasamhita
45. Vishwanathachikitsa
46. Vrindachikitsa

1. Subs. by Act 13 of 1964, s. 31, for the Sch. The First Schedule came into force with effect from 1-2-1969 and the Second Schedule came into force with effect from the 15th September, 1964.
2. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 41 (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
3. Subs. by Notification No. G.S R. 658 (E), dated 31-08-1994.
4. Added by G.S R. 337 (E), dated 15-04-2010 (w.e.f. 20.4.2010).

Serial No. Name of book
47. Ayurvedachintamani
48. Abhinavachintamani
49. Ayurveda-Ratnakara
50. Yogaratnasangraha
51. Rasamrita
52. Dravyagunanighantu
53. Rasamanjari
54. Bangasena 1[54A 6[Ayurvedic Formulary of India and its Parts) 54B Ayurveda Sara Samgraha] 2[54C Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India.] 5[54D.

Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India and its Parts.]

Siddha

55 Siddha Vaidya Thirattu 56 Therayar Maha Karisal 57 Brahma Muni Karukkadai (300) 58 Bhogar (700) 59 Pulippani (500) 60 Agasthiyar Paripuranam (400) 61 Therayar Yamagam 62 Agasthiyar Chenduram (300) 63 Agasthiyar (1500) 64 Athmarakshamrutham 65 Agasthiyar Pin (80) 66 Agasthiyar Rathna Churukkam 67 Therayar Karisal (300) 68 Veeramamuni Nasa Kandam 69 Agasthiyar (600) 70 Agasthiyar Kanma Soothiram 71 18 Siddar‘s Chillarai Kovai 72 Yog Vatha Kaviyam 73 Therayar Tharu 74 Agasthiyar Vaidya Kaviyam (1500) 75 Bala Vagadam 76 Chimittu Rathna (Rathna) Churukkam 77 Nagamuni (200) 78 Agasthiyar Chillarai Kovai 79 Chikicha Rathna Deepam 80 Agasthiyar Nayana Vidhi 81 Yugi Karisal (151) 82 Agasthiyar Vallathi (600) 83 Therayar Thaila Varkam 31[84 Siddha Formulary of India (Part I)] 5[85 Siddha Formulary of India and its Parts]

4[B.—UNANI TIBB SYSTEM] Serial No. Name of book 1 Karabadin Qadri 2 Karabadin Kabir 3 Karabadin Azam 4 Ilaj-ul-Amraz 5 Al Karabadin 6 Biaz Kabir Vol. II 7 Karabadin Jadid 8 Kitab-ul-Taklis 9 Sanat-ul-Taklis 10 Mifta-ul-Khazain 11 Madan-ul-Aksir 12 Makhzan-ul-murabhat 1[13 National Formulary of Unani Medicine 7[****]] 8[14 Unani Pharmacopoeia of India]

1. Ins. by Notifn. No. G.S.R. 735 (E), dated the 28th August, 1987. 6. Subs. by G.S R. 337 (E), dated 15-04-2010 (w.e.f. 20.4.2010).
2. Ins. by Notifn. No. G.S.R. 423 (E), dated the 11th June, 2002. 7. Omitted by GSR 780(E), dt 25-11-2004.
3. Ins. by Notifn. No. G.S.R. 735 (E), dated the 28th August, 1987. 8. Ins by GSR 780 (E), dt. 25.11.20114.
4. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 41 (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
5. Ins. by G.S R. 337 (E), dated 15-04-2010 (w.e.f. 20.4.2010).

4[THE SECOND SCHEDULE (See sections 8 and 16) STANDARDS TO BE COMPLIED WITH BY IMPORTED DRUGS AND BY DRUGS MANUFACTURED FOR SALE, SOLD,
STOCKED OR EXHIBITED FOR SALE OR DISTRIBUTED

Class of drug Standard to be complied with

1 2
1. Patent or proprietary medicines 1[other than Homoeopathic medicines]

2. 2[Substances commonly known as vaccines, sera toxins, toxoids, antitoxins and antigens and biological products of like nature, for human use or for veterinary use.

3[* * * *]

4. Substances (other than food) intended to affect the structure or any function of the human body or intended to be used for the destruction of vermin or insects which cause disease in human beings or animals.

5[1[4-A. Homoeopathic Medicines.
(a) Drugs included in the Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia of India.

(b) Drugs not included in the Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia of India but which are included in the Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia of United States of America or the United kingdom or the German Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia.
(c) Drugs not included in the Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia of India or the United States of America, or the United Kingdom or the German Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia.
The formula of list of ingredients displayed in the prescribed manner on the label of the container and such other standards as may be prescribed.

The standards maintained at the International Laboratory for Biological Standards, Stantans Serum Institute, Copenhagen and at the Central Veterinary Laboratory, Weybridge Surrey, U.K., and such other laboratories recognized by the World Health Organization from time to time, and such further standards of strength, quality and purity, as may be prescribed.]

Such standards as may be prescribed.

Standards of identity, purity and strength specified in the edition of the Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia of India for the time being and such other standards as may be prescribed.

Standards of identity, purity and strength prescribed for the drugs in the edition of such Pharmacopoeia for the time being in which they are given and such other standards as may be prescribed.

The formula or list of ingredients displayed in the prescribed manner on the label of the containder and such other standards as may be prescribed by the Central Government].]

1. Ins. by Notifn. No. S.O. 887, dated the 19th March 1966, Gazette of India , Pt. II, Sec. 3 (ii), p. 819.
2. Subs. by Notifn. No. G.S.R. 299(E), dated the 23rd April 1984.
3. Entry 3 omitted by Notifn. No. G.S.R. 299(E), dated the 23rd April, 1984.
4. Subs. by Act 13 of 1964, S. 31, for the Schedule.
5. Subs. by G.S.R. 820 (E), dt. 6-6-1978, for item 4A, earlier Ins. by Notifn. No. S.O. 887, dated the 19th March 1966, Gazette of India , Pt.
II, Sec. 3 (ii), p. 819.

Class of drug Standard to be complied with

1 2

1[5. Other drugs:
(a) Drugs included in the Indian Pharmacopoeia

(b) Drugs not included in the Indian Pharmacopoeia but which are included in the official Pharmacopoeia of any other country.
Standards of identity, purity and strength specified in the edition of the Indian Pharmacopoeia for the time being in force and such other standards as may be prescribed.

In case the standards of identity, purity and strength for drugs are not specified in the edition of the Indian Pharmacopoeia for the time being in force but are specified in the edition of the Indian pharmacopoeia immediately preceding, the standards of identity, purity and strength shall be those occurring in such immediately preceding edition of the Indian Pharmacopoeia and such other standards as may be prescribed.

Standards of identity, purity and strength specified for drugs in the edition of such official Pharmacopoeia of any other country for the time being in force and such other standards as may be prescribed.

In case the standards of identity, purity and strength for drugs are not specified in the edition of such official Pharmacopoeia for the time being in force, but are specified in the edition immediately preceding, the standards of identity, purity and strength shall be those occurring in such immediately preceding of such official Pharmacopoeia and such other standards as may be prescribed.]]

1. Subs. by Notifn. No. G.S.R. 885, dated the 4th August, 1973, Gazette of India, Pt. II, s. 3(i), p. 1643, for item 5.

[21st December 1945]

Notificaiton: No. F. 28-10/45-H (1). _In exercise of the powers conferred by 1[sections 6(2), 12, 33 and 33N] of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (XXIII of 1940), the Central Government is pleased to make the following Rules:-

PART I
PRELIMINARY

1. Short title, extent and commencement.
Drugs 9[and Cosmetics] Rules, 1945.
(2) They extend to the whole of India. 2[***]

(1) These Rules may be called the

10[***]

2. Definitions.
context In these Rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or

(a) ―the Act‖ means the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (XXIII of 1940) as amended from time to time;
3[(b) ―Central Licence Approving Authority‖ means the Drugs Controller, India, or the Joint Drugs Controller (India) or the Deputy Drugs Controller (India) appointed by the Central Government;]

(c) ―Director‖ means the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory;

(d) ―Form‖ means a form set forth in Schedule A;

4[(dd) Homoeopathic medicines include any drug which is recorded in Homoeopathic provings or therapeutic efficacy of which has been established through long clinical experience as recorded in authoritative Homoeopathic literature of India and abroad and which is prepared according to the techniques of Homoeopathic pharmacy and covers combination of ingredients of such Homoeopathic medicines but does not include a medicine which is administered by parenteral route;]

(e) ―Laboratory‖ means the Central Drugs Laboratory;
5[(ea) ―registered Homoeopathic medical practitioner‖ means a person who is registered in the Central Register or State Register of Homoeopathy;] 8[(eb)―Phytopharmaceutical drug‖ includes purified and standardised fraction with defined minimum four bio-active or phyto-chemical compounds (qualitatively and quantitatively assessed) of an extract of a medicinal plant or its part, for internal or external use of human beings or animals for diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of any disease or disorder but does not include administration by parenteral route.] 6[(ee) ―Registered medical practitioner‖ means a person

(i) holding a qualification granted by an authority specified or notified under section 3 of the Indian Medical Degrees Act, 1916 (7 of 1916), or specified in the Schedules to the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of
1956); or

(ii) registered or eligible for registration in a medical register of a State meant for the registration of persons practising the modern scientific system of medicine 7[excluding the Homoeopathic system of medicine]; or
1. Subs. by G.S.R. 370(E), dt. 7-4-1994. 2. Omitted by G.S.R. 358, dt. 15-3-1975.
3. Sub. by GSR. 579(E), dt. 20-9-2006, earlier Ins. by G.S.R. 923(E), dt. 14-12-1992.
4. Ins. by Notfn. No. F. 1-59 / 68-D, dt. 19-11-1969.
5. Ins. by G.S.R 680 (E), dt. 5-12-1980. 6. Ins. by Notfn. F. 1-22 / 59-D, dt. 9-4-1960.
7. Ins. by S.O. 2139, dt. 15-6-1972. 8. Ins. By G.S.R 918(E), dt. 30-11-2015.
9. Ins. by GSR 1183(E), dt 17-8-1964. 10. Sub-rule (3) omitted by GSR 19, dt. 15-12-1977.

(iii) registered in a medical register, 1[other than a register for the registration of Homoeopathic practitioner], of a State, who although not falling within sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii) is declared by a general or special order made by the State Government in this behalf as a person practising the modern scientific system of medicine for the purposes of this Act; or

(iv) registered or eligible for registration in the register of dentists for a State under the Dentists Act, 1948 (16 of 1948); or

(v) who is engaged in the practice of veterinary medicine and who possesses qualifications approved by the State Government;] 2[(f) ―retail sale‖ means a sale 3[whether to a hospital, or dispensary, or a medical, educational or research institute or to any other person] other than a sale by way of wholesale dealing];
4[(g) ―sale by way of wholesale dealing‖ means sale to a person for the purpose of selling again and includes sale to a hospital, dispensary, medical, educational or research institution;] 5[(h) ―Schedule‖ means a Schedule to these Rules;] 6[(i) State Government in relation to a Union Territory means the Administrator thereof;

9[***]

PART II

3. Functions.
THE CENTRAL DRUGS LABORATORY

It shall be the function of the Laboratory

(i) to analyse or test such samples of drugs as may be sent to it under subsection (2) of section 11, or under sub-section (4) of section 25 of the Act;
7[* * * * *]

(iii) to carry out such other duties as may be entrusted to it by the Central Government or, with the permission of the Central Government, by a State Government after consultation with the Drugs Technical Advisory Board.
8[3A. (1)The functions of the Laboratory in respect of the following drugs or classes of drugs shall be carried out at the Central Research Institute, Kasauli, and the functions of the Director in respect of the said drugs or classes of drugs shall be exercised by the Director of the said Institute :

(1) Sera.

(2) Solution of serum proteins intended for injection.

(3) Vaccines.

(4) Toxins.

(5) Antigens.

2 Subs. by Notfn. No. F. 1-3/51-DS., dt. 15-11-1954.
4. Subs. by Notfn. F-1-16/57, dt. 15.6.1957.
5. Subs. by Notfn. No. F. 28-10/45-H (1), dt. 31-3-1957.
6. Subs. by Notfn. No. F-1-16/57-D, dt. 15-6-1957.
7. Cl. (ii) omitted, by Notfn. No. F-1-16/57-D, dt. 15-6-1957.
8 Ins. by Notfn. No. F. 4-1 / 60-D, dt. 15-5-1961.
9. Cl. (j) omitted by GSR 592(E), dt. 13-08-2008

(6) Anti-toxins.
(7) Sterilized surgical ligature and sterilised surgical suture.
(8) Bacteriophages:

1[Provided that the functions of the Director in respect of Oral Polio Vaccine shall be exercised by the Deputy Director and Head of the Polio Vaccine Testing Laboratory in case of Central Research Institute, Kasauli only.] 2[(1A) The functions of the Laboratory in respect of Oral Polio Vaccine shall be carried out by the following Institutes and the functions of the Director in respect of the said drugs shall be exercised by the Director of the respective Institutes :- (a) Pasteur Institute of India, Coonoor.

(b) Enterovirus Research Centre (Indian Council of Medical Research), Haffkin Institute Compound, Parel, Bombay-400012.] 3[(c) The National Institute of Biologicals, NOIDA.] 4[(2) The functions of the Laboratory in respect of the following drugs or classes of drugs shall be carried out at the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar or Mukteshwar and the functions of the Director in respect of the said drugs or classes of drugs shall be exercised by the Director of either of the said institutes.

(1) Anti-sera for veterinary use.
(2) Vaccines for veterinary use.
(3) Toxoids for veterinary use.
(4) Diagnostic Antigens for veterinary use.]

5[(3) The functions of the laboratory in respect of testing of condoms shall be carried out at the Central Drugs Testing Laboratory, Chennai, and the functions of the Director in respect of the said products shall be exercised by the Director of the said Laboratory.] 6[(4)] The functions of the Laboratory in respect of the following drug shall be carried out at the Laboratory of the Serologist and Chemical Examiner to the Government of India, Calcutta and the functions of the Director in respect of the said drug shall be performed by the Serologist and Chemical Examiner of the said Laboratory :

VDRL Antigen.
7[(5) The function of the Laboratory in respect of Intra-Utrine Devices and Falope Rings shall be carried out at the Central Drugs Testing Laboratory, Thane, Maharashtra and the functions of the Director in respect of the said devices shall be exercised by the Director of the said Laboratory.]

1. Subs. by G.S.R.445(E), dt. 30-4-1992. Earlier Ins. by G.S.R.62(E), dt. 15-2-1982.
3. Ins. by G.S.R.249(E), dt. 4-4-2002.
4. Ins. by Notfn. No. F.-1-6/62-D, dt. 2-7-1969.
5. Sub. By G.S.R. 651(E), dt. 9-9-2009, earlier Ins. by S. O. No. 2139, dt. 12-8-1972.
6. Sub-rule (4) omitted and sub-rule (5) renumbered as sub-rule (4) by Notfn. No. G.S.R. 62(E), dt. 15-2-1982.
7. Subs. by G.S.R 242(E), dt. 18-3-1998. Earlier Ins. by G.S.R. No. 865 (E), dt. 25-10-1990.

1[(6) The functions of the Laboratory in respect of human blood and human blood products including components, to test for freedom of HIV antibodies, shall be carried out by the following Institutes/Hospitals and the functions of the Director in respect of the above mentioned products shall be exercised by the head of the respective Institute, namely:- (a) National Institute for Communicable Disease, Department of Microbiology, Delhi.
(b) National Institute of Virology, Pune (c) Centre of Advanced Research in Virology, Christian Medical College, Vellore.] 2[(7) The functions of the Laboratory in respect of Homoeopathic medicines shall be carried out at the Homoeopathy Pharmacopoeia Laboratory, Ghaziabad and the functions of the Director in respect of the Homoeopathic medicines shall be exercised by the Director of the laboratory.] 3[(8) (a) The functions of the Laboratory in respect of the following kits or class of drugs shall be carried out at the National Institute of Biologicals, Noida and the functions of the Director in respect of the said drugs or class of drugs shall be exercised by the Director of the said institute.
(b) The kits or class of drugs referred to in clause (a) are- (1) Blood grouping reagents.
(2) Diagnostic kits for human immunodeficiency virus, Hepatitis B Surface Antigen and Hepatitis C Virus.
(3) Blood products- (a) Human Albumin;
(b) Human Normal Immunoglobulin (intramuscular and intravenous);
(c) Human Coagulation Factor VIII;
(d) Human Coagulation Factor IX;
(e) Plasma Protein Fractionation;
(f) Fibrin Sealant Kit;
(g) Anti Inhibitor Coagulation complex.
(4) Recombinant products such as- (a) Recombinant insulin and insulin analogue;
(b) r-erythropoietin (EPO);
(c) r-Granulocyte Colony stimulating Factor (G-CSF).
(5) Biochemical kits- (a) Glucose Test Strips;
(b) Fully Automated analyzer based glucose reagents.]

4. Despatch of samples for test or analysis.- (1) Samples for test or analysis under sub-section (4) of section 25 of the Act shall be sent by registered post in a sealed packet, enclosed, together with a memorandum in Form 1, in an outer cover addressed to the Director.
(2) The packet as well as the outer cover, shall be marked with a distinguishing number.
(3) A copy of the memorandum in Form 1 and a specimen impression of the seal used to seal the packet shall be sent separately by registered post to the Director.

5. Recording of condition of seals.
On receipt of the packet, it shall be opened by an officer authorised in writing in that behalf by the Director who shall record the condition of the seal on the packet.
1. Ins. by G.S.R 16(E), dt. 10-1-1990. 2. Ins. by G.S.R 246(E), dt. 1-5-1991.
3. Sub. by G.S.R. No. 908(E), dt. 4-4-2014. Earlier Ins. by G.S.R. No. 249 (E), dt. 4-4-2002.

6. Report of result of test or analysis.
After test or analysis the result of the test or analysis, together with full protocols of the tests applied, shall be supplied forthwith to the sender in Form 2.
7. Fees. The fees for test and analysis shall be those specified in Schedule B.
8. Signature of certificates.
Certificates issued under these Rules by the Laboratory shall be signed by the Director or by an officer authorised by the Central Government by Notification in the Official Gazette to sign such certificates.

1[PART III

[RULES 9 to 20- omitted by SRO. 2136 dated 15-06-1957]

PART IV 2[IMPORT AND REGISTRATION]

21. In this Part.–

3[(a) ―import licence‖ means either a licence in Form 10 to import drugs 4[* *
*]; excluding those specified in Schedule X, or a licence in Form 10-A to import drugs specified in Schedule X;]

(b) ―licensing authority‖ means the authority appointed by the Central Government to perform the duties of the licensing authority under these Rules and includes any person to whom the powers of a licensing authority may be delegated under Rule 22;

(c) ―licence for examination, test or analysis‖ means a licence in Form 11 to import small quantities of drugs the import of which is otherwise prohibited, for the purpose of examination, test or analysis;

5[(d) ―manufacturer‖ includes a manufacturer of drugs, who may be a Company or a unit or a body corporate or any other establishment in a country other than India, having its drugs manufacturing facilities duly approved by the National Regulatory Authority of that country, and who also has a free sale approval of the drugs approved by the said authority in the concerned country, and /or in other major countries;

(e) ―Registration Certificate‖ means a certificate issued under Rule 27A by the licensing authority in Form 41 for registration of the premises and the drugs manufactured by the manufacturer meant for import into and use in India.]

22. The licensing authority may with the approval of the Central Government by an order in writing delegate the 2[power to sign licences and Registration Certificate and] such other powers as may be specified in the order to any other person under his control.

1. Part III (Rules 9 to 20) omitted by Notfn. No. F. 1-16/57-D (SRO 2136), dt. 15-6-1957.
2. Sub. by G.S.R 604 (E), dt. 24-8-2001.
3. Subs. by G.S.R 462 (E),dt. 22-6-1982.
4. Omitted by G.S.R 604 (E), dt. 24-8-2001.

1[23. Import licences.–An import licence in Form 10 shall be required for 2 [import of drugs], excluding those specified in Schedule X, and an import licence in Form 10A shall be required for the import of drugs specified in Schedule X.]

2[24. Form and manner of application for import licence.– (1) An application for an import licence shall be made to the licensing authority in Form 8 for drugs excluding those specified in Schedule X, and in Form 8A for drugs specified in Schedule X, either by the manufacturer himself having a valid wholesale licence for sale or distribution of drugs under these Rules, or by the manufacturer‘s agent in India either having a valid licence under the Rules to manufacture for sale of a drug or having a valid wholesale licence for sale or distribution of drugs under these Rules, and shall be accompanied by a licence fee of one thousand rupees for a single drug and an additional fee at the rate of one hundred rupees for each additional drug and by an undertaking in Form 9 duly signed by or on behalf of the manufacturer:

Provided that in the case of any subsequent application made by the same importer for import licence for drugs manufactured by the same manufacturer, the fee to accompany each such application shall be one hundred rupees for each drug:

(2) Any application for import licence in Form 8 or Form 8-A, as the case may be, shall be accompanied by a copy of Registration Certificate issued in Form 41 under Rule 27A:

Provided that in case of emergencies the licensing authority may, with the approval of the Central Government, issue an import licence in Form 10 or 10A, as the case may be, without the issuance of Registration Certificate under Rule 27A, for reasons to be recorded in writing.

3[Provided further that Registration certificate shall not be required to be accompanied with an application for an import licence under the Rules for the import of in-vitro diagnostic kits and regents, except for the diagnostic kits notified from time to time under sub-clause (iv) of clause (b) of section 3.]

(3) A fee of two hundred and fifty rupees shall be paid for a duplicate copy of the licence issued under this Rule, if the original is defaced, damaged or lost.]

4[24A. Form and manner of application for Registration Certificate.—(1) An application for issue of a Registration Certificate shall be made to the licensing authority in Form 40, either by the manufacturer himself, having a valid wholesale licence for sale or distribution of drugs under these rules, or by his authorised agent in India, either having a valid licence under the rules to manufacture for sale of a drug or having a valid wholesale licence for sale or distribution of drugs under these rules, and shall be accompanied by the fee specified in sub-rule (3) and the informations and undertakings specified in Schedules D-I and D-II duly signed by or on behalf of the manufacturer.

(2) The authorisation by a manufacturer to his agent in India shall be documented by a power of attorney executed and authenticated either in India before a First Class Magistrate, or in the country of origin before such an equivalent authority, the certificate of which is attested by the Indian Embassy of the said country, and the original of the same shall be furnished along with the application for Registration Certificate.
(3) (i) A fee of one thousand and five hundred US dollars 1[or its equivalent in Indian rupees] shall be paid along with the application in Form 40 as registration fee for his premises meant for manufacturing of drugs intended for import into and use in India (ii) A fee of one thousand US dollars 1[or its equivalent in Indian rupees] shall be paid along with the application in Form 40 for the registration of a single drug meant for import into and use in India and an additional fee at the rate of one thousand US dollars for each additional drug:

Provided that in the case of any subsequent application for registration of additional drugs by the same manufacturer, the fee to accompany shall be one thousand US dollars 1[or its equivalent in Indian rupees] for each drug.

(4) The fees shall be paid through a Challan in the Bank of Baroda, Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New Delhi-110001 or any other branch or branches of Bank of Baroda, or any other bank, as notified, from time to time, by the Central Government, to be credited under the Head of Account ―0210-Medical and Public Health, 04-Public Health, 104-Fees and Fines‖:

Provided that in the case of any direct payment of fees by a manufacturer in the country of origin, the fees shall be paid through Electronic Clearance System (ECS) from any bank in the country of origin to the Bank of Baroda, Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New Delhi, through the Electronic Code of the bank in the Head of Account ―0210Medical and Public Health, 04- Public Health, 104-Fee and Fines‖, and the original receipt of the said transfer shall be treated as an equivalent to the bank challan, subject to the approval by the Bank of Baroda that they have received the payment.

(5) The applicant shall be liable for the payment of a fee of five thousand US dollars 1[or its equivalent in Indian rupees] for expenditure as may be required for inspection or visit of the manufacturing premises or drugs, by the licensing authority or by any other persons to whom powers have been delegated in this behalf by the licensing authority under Rule 22.

(6) The applicant shall be liable for the payment of testing fees directly to a testing laboratory approved by the Central Government in India or abroad, as may be required for examination, tests and analysis of drug.
(7) A fee of three hundred US dollars 1[or its equivalent in Indian rupees] shall be paid for a duplicate copy of the Registration Certificate, if the original is defaced, damaged or lost.

(8) No Registration Certificate shall be required under these Rules in respect of an inactive bulk substance to be used for a drug formulation, with or without pharmacopoeial conformity.]

25. Licences for import of drugs manufactured by one manufacturer.– (1) A single application may be made, and a single licence may be issued, in respect of the import of more than one drug or class of drugs manufactured by the same manufacturer:

1[Provided that the drugs or classes of drugs are manufactured at one factory or more than one factory functioning conjointly as a single manufacturing unit:

Provided further that if a single manufacturer has two or more factories situated in different places manufacturing the same or different drugs a separate licence shall be required in respect of the drugs manufactured by each such factory.]

2[* * * * *]

3[25A. Condition to be satisfied before a licence in Form 10 or Form 10-A is granted. (1) A licence in Form 10 or in Form 10-A shall be granted by the licensing authority having regard to–

(i) the premises, where the imported substances will be stocked, are equipped with proper storage accommodation for preserving the properties of the drugs to which the licence applies; and

(ii) the occupation, trade or business ordinarily carried out by the applicant:

Provided that the licensing authority may refuse to grant a licence in Form 10-A in respect of any applicant where he is satisfied,--

(a) that the applicant has not complied with the provisions of the Act or these rules; or

(b) that by reasons of— 4[(i) his conviction under the Act or these Rules or the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985) or the rules made thereunder;]

(ii) previous suspension or cancellation of the licence granted to him;

he is not a fit person to whom licence shall be granted.

(2) Any person who is aggrieved by the order passed by the licensing authority under this Rule may, within thirty days of the receipt of the order, appeal to the Central Government and the Central Government may after such enquiry into the matter as it considers necessary and after giving the appellant an opportunity for making a representation in the matter, make such orders in relation thereto as it thinks fit.]

1. Ins. by Notfn. No. F. 1-19/48-D, dt. 27-10-1949.
2. Omitted Notfn. No.F. 1-16/57-D, dt. 15-6-1957.
3. Subs. by G.S.R 462(E), dt. 22-6-1982. Earlier Ins. by Notfn. No. F. 1-9/52-D. dt. 3-11-1958.

1[25B. Registration Certificate for import of drugs manufactured by one manufacturer.--(1) A single application may be made, and a single Registration Certificate in Form 41 may be issued in respect of the import of more than one drug or class of drugs, manufactured by the same manufacturer:

Provided that the drug or classes of drugs, are manufactured at one factory or more than one factory functioning conjointly as a single manufacturing unit:

Provided further that if a single manufacturer has two or more factories situated in different places manufacturing the same or different drugs, separate Registration Certificates shall be required in respect of the drugs manufactured by each such factory.]

26. Conditions of import licence.
following conditions:
An import licence shall be subject to the

(i) the manufacturer shall at all times observe the undertaking given by him or on his behalf in Form 9;

(ii) the licensee shall allow any Inspector authorised by the licensing authority in that behalf to enter with or without notice any premises where the imported substance is stocked, to inspect the means, if any, employed for testing the substance and to take samples;

(iii) the licensee shall on request furnish to the licensing authority from every batch of each substance or from such batch or batches as the licensing authority may from time to time specify a sample of such amount as the licensing authority may consider adequate for any examination required to be made, and the licensee shall, if so required, furnish full protocols of the tests, if any, which have been applied;

(iv) if the licensing authority so directs the licensee shall not sell or offer for sale any batch in respect of which a sample is or protocols are furnished under the last preceding sub-rule until a certificate authorising the sale of the batch has been issued to him by or on behalf of the licensing authority;

(v) the licensee shall, on being informed by the licensing authority that any part of any batch of the substance has been found by the licensing authority not to conform with the standards of strength, quality and purity prescribed by Chapter III of the Act, or the rules thereunder and on being directed so to do, withdraw the remainder of that batch from sale and, so far as may in the particular circumstances of the case be practicable, recall the issues already made from that batch;

(vi) the licensee shall maintain a record of all sales by him of substances for the import of which a licence is required, showing particulars of the substance and of the person to whom sold and such further particulars, if any, as the licensing authority may specify and such record shall be open to the inspection of any Inspector authorised in that behalf by the licensing authority:

1. Ins. by G.S.R. No. 604(E), dt. 24-8-2001.

1[Provided that in respect of the sale or distribution of drugs specified in Schedule X, the licensee shall maintain a separate record or register showing the following particulars, namely:

1. Name of the Drug,

2. Batch number,

3. Name and address of the manufacturer,

4. Date of transaction,

5. Opening stock on the business day,

6. Quantity of drug received, if any, and the source from which received,

7. Name of the purchaser, his address and licence number,

8. Balance quantity of drug at the end of the business day,

9. Signature of the person under whose supervision the drugs have been supplied.]

(vii) the licensee shall comply with such further requirements, if any, applicable to the holders of import licenses, as may be specified in any rules, subsequently made under Chapter III of the Act and of which the licensing authority has given to him not less than four months‘ notice.

27. Grant of import licence.
On receipt of an application for an import licence in the form and manner prescribed in Rule 24, the licensing authority shall, on being satisfied that, if granted, the conditions of the licence will be observed, issue an import licence in Form 10 1[or From 10A, as the case may be].

2[27A Grant of Registration Certificate.
(1) On receipt of an application for Registration Certificate in the Form and manner specified in Rule 24A, the licensing authority shall, on being satisfied, that, if granted, the conditions of the Registration Certificate will be observed, issue a Registration Certificate in Form 41:

Provided further that if the application is complete in all respects and informations specified in Schedules D-I and D-II are in order, the licensing authority shall, within nine months from the date of receipt of an application, issue such Registration Certificate, and in exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be recorded in writing, the Registration Certificate may be issued within such extended period, not exceeding three months, as the licensing authority may deem fit.

(2) If the applicant does not receive the Registration Certificate within the period as specified in the proviso to sub-rule (1), he may appeal to the Central Government and the Central Government may after such enquiry into the matter, as it considers necessary, may pass such orders in relation thereto as it thinks fit.]

1[28. Duration of import licence. A licence unless, it is sooner suspended or cancelled, shall be 2[valid for a period of three years from the date of its issue:]

Provided that if application for a fresh licence is made three months before the expiry of the existing licence the current licence shall be deemed to continue in force until orders are passed on the application.]

3[28A. Duration of Registration Certificate.—- A Registration Certificate, unless, it is sooner suspended or cancelled, shall be valid for a period of three years from the date of its issue:

Provided that if the application for a fresh Registration Certificate is made nine months before the expiry of the existing certificate, the current Registration Certificate shall be deemed to continue in force until orders are passed on the application.]

4[29. Suspension and cancellation of import licence.
If the manufacturer or licensee fails to comply with any of the conditions of an import licence, the licensing authority may after giving the manufacturer or licensee an opportunity to show cause why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing stating the reasons therefor, suspend or cancel it for such period as it thinks fit, either wholly or in respect of some of the substances to which it relates:

Provided that a person, who is aggrieved by the order passed by the licensing authority under this rule may, within thirty days of the receipt of the order, appeal to the Central Government, and the Central Government may, after such enquiry into the matter as it considers necessary and after giving the appellant an opportunity for representing his views in the matter, pass such orders in relation thereto as it thinks fit.]

3[29A. Suspension and cancellation of Registration Certificate. —If the manufacturer fails to comply with any of the conditions of the Registration Certificate, the licensing authority may after giving him an opportunity to show cause why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing stating the reasons therefor, suspend or cancel the Registration Certificate for such period as it thinks fit either wholly or in respect of some of the substances to which it relates:

Provided that a person, who is aggrieved by the order passed by the licensing authority under this rule may, within thirty days of the receipt of the order, appeal to the Central Government, and the Central Government may, after such enquiry into the matter as it considers necessary and after giving the appellant an opportunity for representing his views in the matter, pass such orders in relation thereto as it thinks fit.]

1. Amended by Notfn. No. F. 1-10/62-D, dt. 19-4-1964.

30. Prohibition of import after expiry of potency. —No biological or other special product specified in Schedule C or C (I) shall be imported after the date shown on the label, wrapper or container of the drug as the date up to which the drug may be expected to retain a potency not less than, or not to acquire a toxicity greater than, that required, or as the case may be, permitted by the prescribed test.
1[* * * * *]

2[30AA. Import of new Homoeopathic medicine.—(1) No new Homoeopathic medicine shall be imported except under and in accordance with the permission in writing of the Licensing Authority.

(2) The importer of a New Homoeopathic medicine when applying for permission shall produce before the Licensing Authority such documentary and other evidence as may be required by the Licensing Authority for assessing the therapeutic efficacy of the medicine including the minimum provings carried out with it.] 3[Explanation. —For the purpose of this rule, ̳New Homoeopathic Medicine‘ means—

(i) a Homoeopathic medicine which is not specified in the Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia of India or United States of America or of the United Kingdom or the German Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia; or

(ii) which is not recognized in authoritative Homoeopathic literature as efficacious under the conditions recommended; or (iii) a combination of Homoeopathic medicines containing one or more medicines which are not specified in any of the Pharmacopoeias referred to in clause (i) as Homoeopathic medicines and also not recognized in authoritative Homoeopathic literature as efficacious under the conditions recommended.] 4[30B. Prohibition of import of certain drugs.

No drug, the manufacture, sale or distribution of which is prohibited in the country of origin, shall be imported under the same name or under any other name except for the purpose of examination, test or analysis.] 5[31. Standard for certain imported drugs.—No drug shall be imported unless it complies with the standard of strength, quality and purity, if any, and the test prescribed in the Rules shall be applicable for determining whether any such imported drug complies with the said standard:

Provided that the drugs intended for veterinary use, the standards of strength, quality and purity, if any, shall be those that are specified in Schedule F(1) and the test prescribed in that Schedule shall be applicable for determining whether any such imported drug complies with the said standards and where no standards are specified in Schedule F(1) for any veterinary drug, the standards for such drug shall be those specified in the current edition, for the time being in force, of the British Pharmacopoeia Veterinary:

1. Rule 30A omitted by G.S.R.944 (E), dt. 21-9-1988. Earlier rules 30A and 30AA ins. by Notfn. F. 130/48-G, Dt. 14.4.1952.
2. Ins. by notification No. F 1-30/48, dt. 14-01-1952.
3. Subs. G.S.R. 680 (E) ,dt. 5-12-1980.
4. Ins. by Notfn. No. F. 1-45 4-1-1951.
5. Subs. G.S.R. 604 (E), dt. 24-8-2001.

Provided further that the licensing authority shall not allow the import of any drug having less than sixty per cent residual shelf-life period as on the date of import:

Provided also that in exceptional cases the licensing authority may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, may allow, the import of any drug having lesser shelf-life period, but before the date of expiry as declared on the container of the drug.] 1[32. Packing and labelling of imported drugs. No drug shall be imported unless it is packed and labelled in conformity with the Rules in Parts IX and X 2[* * *] and further conform to the standards laid down in Part XII provided that in the case of drugs intended for veterinary use, the packing and labelling shall conform to the rules in Parts IX and X and Schedule F(1)].

3[32A Packing and Labelling of Homoeopathic medicine. No Homoeopathic medicine shall be imported unless it is packed and labelled in conformity with the rules in Part IX-A.]
33. Import of drugs for examination, test or analysis Small quantities of drugs the import of which is otherwise prohibited under section 10 of the Act may be imported for the purpose of examination, test or analysis subject to the following conditions:

(a) No drug shall be imported for such purpose except under a licence in Form 11;

(b) the licensee shall use the substances imported under the licence exclusively for purposes of examination, test or analysis and shall carry on such examination, test or analysis in the place specified in the licence, or in such other places as the licensing authority may from time to time authorise;

(c) the licensee shall allow any Inspector authorized by the licensing authority in this behalf to enter, with or without prior notice, the premises where the substances are kept, and to inspect the premises, and investigate the manner in which the substances are being used and to take samples thereof;

(d) the licensee shall keep a record of, and shall report to the licensing authority, the substances imported under the licence, together with the quantities imported, the date of importation and the name of the manufacturer;

(e) the licensee shall comply with such further requirements, if any, applicable to the holders of licences for examination, test or analysis as may be specified in any rules subsequently made under Chapter III of the Act and of which the licensing authority has given to him not less than one month‘s notice.

1. Subs. by Notfn. No. F. 1-6/62-D (SO 2889), dt. 2-7-1969.
2. Certain words omitted by G.S.R. 661(E), dt. 3-7-1992.
3. Ins. by S. O. No. 2139, dt. 5-6-1972.

1[33A Import of drugs by a Government Hospital or Autonomous Medical Institution for the treatment of patients.—Small quantities of new drug, as defined in Rule 122-E, the import of which is otherwise prohibited under section 10 of the Act, may be imported for treatment of patients suffering from life threatening diseases, or diseases causing serious permanent disability, or such disease requiring therapies for unmet medical needs, by a Medical Officer of a Government Hospital or an Autonomous Medical Institution providing tertiary care, duly certified by the Medical Superintendent of the Government Hospital, or Head of the Autonomous Medical Institution, subject to the following conditions, namely:-

(a) no new drug shall be imported for the said purpose except under a licence in Form 11-A, and the said drug has been approved for marketing in the country of origin;

(b) the licensee shall use the substances or drugs imported under the licence exclusively for the purpose of treatment of patients suffering from life threatening diseases, or diseases causing serious permanent disability, or such diseases requiring therapies for unmet medical needs, under the supervision of its own Medical Officers at the place, specified in the licence or at such other places, as the licensing authority, may from time to time authorise;

(c) the licensee shall allow an Inspector authorised by the licensing authority in this behalf to enter, with or without prior notice, the premises where the substances or drugs are stocked, and to inspect the premises and relevant records and investigate the manner in which the substances or drugs are being used and to take, if necessary, samples thereof ;

(d) the licensee shall keep a record of, and shall submit the said report half yearly to the licensing authority, the substances or drugs imported under the licence, together with the quantities imported and issued to the patients, the date of importation, the name of the manufacturer, the name and address of the patient for whom the drug is prescribed and the name of disease;

(e) the licensee shall comply with such other requirements, if any, applicable to the holders of import licences for import of new drugs for treatment of patients by Government Hospitals, as may be specified from time to time in any rule subsequently made under Chapter III of the Act and of which the licensing authority has given to him not less than one month‘s notice;

(f) the drug shall be stocked under proper storage conditions and shall be dispensed under the supervision of a registered pharmacist;

(g) the quantity of any single drug so imported shall not exceed 100 average dosages per patient:

Provided that the licensing authority may, in exceptional circumstances, sanction the import of drug of a larger quantity.]

34. Application for licence for examination, test or analysis. (1) An application for a licence for examination, test or analysis shall be made in Form 12 and shall be made or countersigned by the head of the institution in which, or by a proprietor or director of the company or firm by which the examination, test or analysis will be conducted.

(2) The licensing authority may require such further particulars to be supplied as he may consider necessary.

1[(3) Every application in Form 12 shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred rupees for a single drug and an additional fee of fifty rupees for each additional drug.

(4) The fees shall be paid through a challan in the Bank of Baroda, Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New Delhi-110001 or any other branch or branches of Bank of Baroda, or any other Bank, as notified, from time to time, by the Central Government, to be credited under the Head of Account 0210-Medical and Public Health, 04- Public Health, 104- Fees and Fines.]

2[34A. Application for licence to import small quantities of new drugs by a Government Hospital or Autonomous Medical Institution for the treatment of patients. (1) An application for an import licence for small quantities of a new drug, as defined in Rule 122-E for the purpose of treatment of patients suffering from life threatening diseases, or diseases causing serious permanent disability, or such diseases requiring therapies for unmet medical needs, shall be made in Form 12-AA, by a Medical Officer of the Government Hospital or Autonomous Medical Institution, which shall be certified by the Medical Superintendent of the Government Hospital or Head of the Autonomous Medical Institution, as the case may be.

(2) The licensing authority may require such further particulars to be supplied, as he may consider necessary.

(3) Every application in Form 12-AA shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred rupees for a single drug and an additional fee of fifty rupees for each additional drug.

(4) The fees shall be paid through a challan in the Bank of Baroda, Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New Delhi-110001 or any other branch or branches of Bank of Baroda, or any other Bank, as notified, from time to time, by the Central Government, to be credited under the Head of Account 0210- Medical and Public Health, 04- Public Health, 104- Fees and Fine.]

35. Cancellation of licence for examination, test or analysis. (1) A licence for examination, test or analysis may be cancelled by the licensing authority for breach of any of the conditions subject to which the licence was issued.

(2) A licensee whose licence has been cancelled may appeal to the Central Government within three months of the date of the order.

1[35A. Cancellation of licence for import of small quantities of new drugs. (1) A licence for import of small quantities of a new drug, defined in Rule122E, for the purpose of the treatment of patients suffering from life threatening diseases, or diseases causing serious permanent disability, or such diseases requiring therapies for unmet medical needs, by a Government Hospital or an Autonomous Medical Institution may be cancelled by the licensing authority for breach of any of the conditions subject to which the licence was issued or for contravention of any of the provisions of the Act and rules made thereunder.
(2) A licensee whose licence has been cancelled may appeal to the Central Government within three months from the date of the receipt of the order, and the Central Government may after such enquiry into the matter, as it considers necessary and after giving the appellant an opportunity for representing his views, may pass such orders in relation thereto, as it thinks fit.]

36. Import of drugs for personal use. Small quantities of drugs, the import of which is otherwise prohibited under section 10 of the Act, may be imported for personal use subject to the following conditions:
(i) the drugs shall form part of a passenger‘s bona fide baggage and shall be the property of, and be intended for, the exclusive personal use of the passenger;
(ii) the drugs shall be declared to the Customs authorities if they so direct;
(iii) the quantity of any single drug so imported shall not exceed one hundred average doses :
Provided that the licensing authority may in an exceptional case in any individual case sanction the import of a larger quantity:
2[Provided further that any drug, imported for personal use but not forming part of bona fide personal baggage, may be allowed to be imported subject to the following conditions, namely:
(i) the licensing authority, on an application made to it in Form 12A is satisfied that the drug is for bona fide personal use;
(ii) the quantity to be imported is reasonable in the opinion of the licensing authority and is covered by prescription from a registered medical practitioner ;
and (iii) the licensing authority grants a permit in respect of the said drug in Form 12B.]

3[37. Packing of patent or proprietary medicine. —Patent or proprietary medicines shall be imported in containers intended for retail sale:
4[Provided that such medicines may be imported in bulk containers by any person who holds a licence to manufacture, if such person has obtained permission in writing to import such medicines from the licensing authority at least three months prior to the date of import and the imports are made within a period of twelve months from the date of issue of such permission].]
38. Statement to accompany imported drugs. All consignments of drugs sought to be imported shall be accompanied by an invoice or other statement showing the name and address of the manufacturer and the name and quantities of the drugs.
39. Documents to be supplied to the Customs Collector. Before drugs for the import of which a licence is not required are imported a declaration signed by or on behalf of the manufacturer or by or on behalf of the importer that the drugs comply with the provisions of Chapter III of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules thereunder shall be supplied to the Customs Collector.

2. Ins. by Notfn. No.F-1-36/54-D.S., (SRO 560), dt. 3-3-1955.
3. Ins. by Notfn. No.F-1-3/51-D.S., (SRO 3262), dt. 15-10-1954.
4. Ins. by Notfn. No.F-1-45/58-D, (SO 115), dt. 4-1-1961.

1[40. Procedure for the import of drugs. (1) If the Customs Collector has reason to doubt whether any drugs comply with the provisions of Chapter III of the Act and Rules thereunder he may, and if requested by an officer appointed for this purpose by the Central Government shall, take samples of any drugs in the consignment and forward them to the Director of the laboratory appointed for this purpose by the Central Government and may detain the drugs in the consignment of which samples have been taken until the report of the Director of the said laboratory or any other officer empowered by him on this behalf, subject to the approval of the Central Government, on such samples is received:

Provided that if the importer gives an undertaking in writing not to dispose of the drugs without the consent of the Customs Collector and to return the consignment or such portion thereof as may be required, the Customs Collector shall make over the consignment to the importer.

(2) If an importer who has given an undertaking under the proviso to sub-rule (1) is required by the Customs Collector to return the consignment or any portion thereof he shall return the consignment or portion thereof within ten days of receipt of the notice.]

2[41. (1) If the Director of the laboratory appointed for the purpose by the Central Government or any other officer empowered by him on this behalf, subject to the approval of the Central Government, reports to the Customs Collector that the samples of any drug in a consignment are not of standard quality, or that the drug contravenes in any other respect the provisions of Chapter III of the Act or the Rules thereunder and that the contravention is such that it cannot be remedied by the importer, the Customs Collector shall communicate the report forthwith to the importer who shall, within two months of his receiving the communication either export all the drugs of that description in the consignment, to the country in which they were manufactured or forfeit them to the Central Government which shall cause them to be destroyed :

Provided that the importer may within fifteen days of receipt of the report make a representation against the report to the Customs Collector, and the Customs Collector shall forward the representation with a further sample to the licensing authority, who after obtaining, if necessary, the report of the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory, shall pass orders thereon which shall be final.

3[(2) If the Director of the laboratory appointed for the purpose by the Central Government or any other officer empowered by him on this behalf, subject to the approval of the Central Government reports to the Customs Collector that the samples of any drug contravene in any respect the provisions of Chapter III of the Act or the Rules thereunder and that the contravention is such that it can be remedied by the importer, the Customs Collector shall communicate the report forthwith to the importer and permit him to import the drug on his giving an undertaking in writing not to dispose of the drug without the permission of the officer authorised in this behalf by the Central Government.]]

4[* * * * *]

1. Subs. by Notifn. 1-99/52-D.S., dated 3-11-1953.
4. Rule 42 omitted by Notfn. No. F. 1-9/52-DS., dt. 3-11-1953.

43. The drugs specified in Schedule D shall be exempt from the provisions of Chapter III of the Act and of the Rules made thereunder to the extent, and subject to the conditions specified in that Schedule.

1[43A. No drug shall be imported into India except through one of the following places, namely:
Freozepore Cantonment and Amritsar Railway Stations:

In respect of drugs imported by rail across the frontier with Pakistan.

Ranaghat, Bongaon and Mohiassan Railways Stations:

In respect of drugs imported by rail across the frontier with Bangladesh.

5[Petrapole Road in West Bengal, Sutarkandi in Assam, Old Raghna Bazar and Agartala in Tripura :

In respect of drugs imported by Road from Bangladesh;]

2[Raxaul:
In respect of drugs imported by road and railway lines connecting Raxaul in India and Birganj in Nepal;]

4[Chennai, Kolkata, Mumbai, Cochin, Nhava Sheva, Kandla and Inland Container Depots at Tuglakabad and Patparganj in Delhi and Tuticorin in Tamil Nadu and Marmugao port in Goa and Visakhapatnam in Andhra Pradesh:
In respect of drugs imported by sea into India;

Chennai, Kolkata, Mumbai, Delhi,Ahmedabad, Hyderabad, Goa, Bengaluru and Visakhapatnam:
in respect of drugs imported by air into India.]

4[43-B. Drugs, consignments of which are in transit through India to foreign countries and which shall not be sold or distributed in India shall be exempted from the requirements of Chapter III of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the Rules made thereunder:

Provided that if the Government of the countries to which the drugs are consigned regulate their import by the grant of import licences, the importer shall at the time of import into India, produce such import licences.]

1. Subs. by G.S.R 478 (E), dt. 6-8-1981. Earlier Ins. by Notfn No. F.7/7/47-D. dt. 5-1-1954.
3. Sub. by G.S.R 532 (E), dt. 18-05-2016. Earlier sub. by G.S.R 575 (E), dt. 17-11-2012, G.S.R 101 (E), dt.
18-2-2011, G.S.R 45 (E), dt. 21-1-2010, G.S.R 504 (E), dt. 18-7-2002, G.S.R 647 (E), dt. 28-10-1998.
4. Added by Notfn. No. E. 1-60/D, (SO 1056) dt. 19-3-1964.
5. Ins. by G.S.R. 116 (E), 24-01-2009.

PART V

1[GOVERNMENT ANALYSTS, INSPECTORS, LICENSING AUTHORITIES AND CONTROLLING AUTHORITIES] 2[44. Qualifications of Government Analyst.
Government Analyst under the Act shall be a person who A person appointed as a

(a) is a graduate in medicine or science or pharmacy or Pharmaceutical Chemistry of a 3[University established in India by law or has an equivalent qualification recognized and notified by the Central Government for such purpose] and has had not less than five years‘ post-graduate experience in the testing of drugs in a laboratory under control of (i) a Government Analyst appointed under the Act, or (ii) the head of an Institution or testing laboratory approved for the purpose by the appointing authority, 4[or has completed two years‘ training on testing of drugs, including items stated in Schedule C, in Central Drugs Laboratory], or

(b) possesses a post-graduate degree in medicine or science or pharmacy or Pharmaceutical chemistry of a 3[University established in India by law or has an equivalent qualification recognized and notified by the Central Government for such purpose] or possesses the Associateship Diploma of the Institution of Chemists (India) obtained by passing the said examination with ̳Analysis of Drugs and Pharmaceuticals‘ as one of the subjects and has had after obtaining the said post-graduate degree or diploma not less than three years‘ experience in the testing of drugs in a laboratory under the control of (i) a Government Analyst appointed under the Act, or (ii) the head of an Institution or testing laboratory approved for the purpose by the appointing authority 4[or has completed training on testing of drugs, including items stated in Schedule C, in Central Drugs Laboratory]:

Provided that4[(i) for purpose of examination of items in Schedule C,-

(ia) the persons appointed under clause (a) or (b) and having degree in Medicine, Physiology, Pharmacology, Microbiology, Pharmacy should have experience or training in testing of said items in an institution or laboratory approved by the appointing authority for a period of not less than six months;

(ib) the person appointed under clause(a) or (b) but not having degree in the above subjects should have experience or training in testing of said Schedule C drugs for a period of not less than three years in an institution or laboratory approved by the appointing authority or have completed two years training on testing of drugs including items stated in Schedule C in Central Drugs Laboratory;]

2. Subs. by G.S.R. No. 1427, dt. 22-10-1977.
3. Subs. by G.S.R. 71(E), dt 30.1.1987.
4. Ins. by G.S.R 697(E) dt. 26-10-1995.

(ii) for a period of four years from the date on which Chapter IV of the Act takes effect in the States, persons whose training and experience are regarded by the appointing authority as affording, subject to such further training, if any, as may be considered necessary, a reasonable guarantee of adequate knowledge and competence, may be appointed as Government Analysts. The persons so appointed may, if the appointing authority so desires, continue in service after the expiry of the said period of four years;

(iii) no person who is engaged directly or indirectly in any trade or business connected with the manufacture of drugs shall be appointed as a Government Analyst for any area:

Provided further that for the purpose of examination of Anti-sera, Toxoid and Vaccines and Diagnostic Antigens for Veterinary use, the person appointed shall be a person who is a graduate in Veterinary Science, or general science, or medicine or pharmacy and has had not less than five years‘ experience in the standardization of biological products or person holding a post-graduate degree in Veterinary Science, or general science, or medicine or pharmacy or pharmaceutical chemistry with an experience of not less than three years in the standardization of biological products :

Provided also that persons, already appointed as Government Analysts may continue to remain in service, if the appointing authority so desires, notwithstanding the fact that they do not fulfil the qualifications as laid down in clause (a), clause (b) or the preceding proviso.

45. Duties of Government Analysts.−(1) The Government Analyst shall cause to be analysed or tested such samples or drugs 1[and cosmetics] as may be sent to him by Inspectors or other persons under the provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and shall furnish reports of the results of test or analysis in accordance with these Rules.
(2) A Government Analyst shall from time to time forward to the Government reports giving the result of analytical work and research with a view to their publication at the discretion of Government.

46. Procedure on receipt of sample.−On receipt of a package from an Inspector containing a sample for test or analysis, the Government Analyst shall compare the seals on the packet 2[or on portion of sample or container] with the specimen impression received separately and shall note the condition of the seals on the 3[packet or on portion of sample or container]. After the test or analysis has been completed, he shall forthwith supply to the Inspector a report in triplicate in Form 13 of the result of the test or analysis, together with full protocols of the tests or analysis applied:

1. Ins. by S.O. 2139 dt. 5-6-1972.
3. Subs.by G.S.R. 59(E),dt. 7-2-1995.

1[Explanation. It shall be deemed to be full and sufficient compliance with the requirement of the rule in respect of the supply of ―protocols of the tests or analysis applied‖, if

(1) for pharmacopoeial drug, where the tests or methods of analysis prescribed in the official pharmacopoeia are followed, references to the specific tests or analysis in the pharmacopoeias are given in the report;

(2) for patent or proprietary medicines for which the tests and methods prescribed in any of the official pharmacopoeias are applicable and are followed, references to the specific tests or analysis in the pharmacopoeias are given in the report;

(3 )for patent or proprietary medicines containing pharmacopoeial drugs for which the official tests or analysis or methods of assays are modified and applied, a description of the actual tests or, as the case may be, analysis or methods of assays so applied is given in the report;

(4) for patent or proprietary medicines for which no pharmacopoeial tests or methods of analysis are available or can be applied but for which tests or methods of analysis given in standard books or journals are followed, a description of such tests or methods of analysis applied together with the reference to the relevant books or journals from which the tests or methods of analysis have been adopted, is given in the report;

(5) for those drugs for which methods of test are not available and have been evolved by the Government Analyst, a description of tests applied is given in the report.]

47. Report of result of test or analysis.
An application from a purchaser for test or analysis of a drug under section 26 of the Act shall be made in Form 14 A and the report of test or analysis of the drug made on such application shall be supplied to the applicant in Form 14B.

48. Fees.
The fees to be paid by a person submitting to the Government Analyst under section 26 of the Act for test or analysis of a drug 3[or cosmetic] purchased by him shall be those specified in Schedule B.

2[49. Qualifications of Inspectors. —A person who is appointed an Inspector under the Act shall be a person who has a degree in Pharmacy or Pharmaceutical Sciences or Medicine with specialisation in Clinical Pharmacology or Microbiology from a University established in India by law:
Provided that only those Inspectors: ⎯

1. Ins. by No. F. 1-60/61-D, dt. 12-7-1962 (G.S.R 984 (E), dt. 12-7-1962).
2. Subs. by No. G.S.R 658 (E), dt. 19-10-1993.
3. Ins. by No. G.S.R 1140 (E), dt. 26-8-1978.

(i) Who have not less than 18 months‘ experience in the manufacture of at least one of the substances specified in Schedule C, or

(ii) Who have not less than 18 months‘ experience in testing of at least one of the substances in Schedule C in a laboratory approved for this purpose by the licensing authority, or

(iii) Who have gained experiences of not less than three years in the inspection of firms manufacturing any of the substances specified in Schedule C during the tenure of their services as Drugs Inspectors;
shall be authorised to inspect the manufacture of the substances mentioned in Schedule C:]

1[Provided further that the requirement as to the academic qualification shall not apply to persons appointed as Inspectors on or before the 18th day of October, 1993.]

2[ 49A. Qualification of a Licensing Authority.—No person shall be qualified to be a Licensing Authority under the Act unless:-

(i) he is a graduate in Pharmacy or Pharmaceutical Chemistry or in Medicine with specialization in clinical pharmacology or microbiology from a University established in India by law; and

(ii) he has experience in the manufacture or testing of drugs or enforcement of the provisions of the Act for a minimum period of five years:

3[ Provided that the requirements as to the academic qualification shall not apply to those inspectors and the Government Analysts who were holding those positions on the 12th day of April,1989.]]

4[50. Controlling authority. (1) All Inspectors appointed by the Central Government shall be under the control of an officer appointed in this behalf by the Central Government.

(2) All Inspectors appointed by the State Government shall be under the control of an officer appointed in this behalf by the State Government.

(3) For the purposes of these rules an officer appointed by the Central Government under sub-rule (1), or as the case may be, an officer appointed by the State Government under sub-rule (2), shall be a controlling authority.]

3. Subs. by G.S.R. 532 (E), dt. 14.8.1991.
4. Subs. by S.O. 2139, dt. 5-6-1972.

1[50A. Qualification of a Controlling Authority.
to be a Controlling Authority under the Act unless (1) No person shall be qualified

(i) he is a graduate in Pharmacy or Pharmaceutical Chemistry or in Medicine with specialization in Clinical Pharmacology or Microbiology from a University established in India by law; and

(ii) he has experience in the manufacture or testing of drugs or enforcement of the provisions of the Act for a minimum period of five years:

2[Provided that the requirements as to the academic qualifications shall not apply to those Inspectors and the Government Analysts who were holding those positions on the 12th day of April, 1989.]

51. Duties of Inspectors of premises licensed for sale.
Subject to the instructions of the controlling authority, it shall be duty of an Inspector authorized to inspect premises licensed for the sale of drugs

(1) to inspect 3[not less than once a year] all establishments licensed for the sale of drugs within the area assigned to him;

(2) to satisfy himself that the conditions of the licences are being observed;

(3) to procure and send for test or analysis, if necessary, imported packages which he has reason to suspect contain drugs being sold or stocked or exhibited for sale in contravention of the provisions of the Act or Rules thereunder;

(4) to investigate any complaint in writing which may be made to him;

(5) to institute prosecutions in respect of breaches of the Act and Rules thereunder;

(6) to maintain a record of all inspections made and action taken by him in the performance of his duties, including the taking of samples and the seizure of stocks, and to submit copies of such record to the controlling authority;

(7) to make such enquiries and inspections as may be necessary to detect the sale of drugs in contravention of the Act;

(8) when so authorized by the State Government, to detain imported packages which he has reason to suspect contain drugs, the import of which is prohibited.

52. Duties of Inspectors specially authorized to inspect the manufacture of 1[drugs or cosmetics]. Subject to the instructions of the controlling authority it shall be the duty of an Inspector authorized to inspect the manufacture of drugs

(1) to inspect 2[not less than once a year], all premises licensed for manufacture of 1[drugs or cosmetics] within the area allotted to him to satisfy himself that the conditions of the licence and provisions of the Act and Rules thereunder are being observed;

(2) in the case of establishments licensed to manufacture products specified in Schedules C and C(1) to inspect the plant and the process of manufacture, the means employed for standardizing and testing the 2[drugs or cosmetics], the methods and place of storage, the technical qualifications of the staff employed and all details of location, construction and administration of the establishment likely to affect the potency or purity of the product;

(3) to send forthwith to the controlling authority after each inspection a detailed report indicating the conditions of the licence and provisions of the Act and rules thereunder which are being observed and the conditions and provisions, if any, which are not being observed;

(4) to take samples of the 1[drugs or cosmetics] manufactured on the premises and send them for test or analysis in accordance with these Rules;

(5) to institute prosecutions in respect of breaches of the Act and Rules thereunder.

53. Prohibition of disclosure of information.
Except for the purposes of official business or when required by a Court of Law, an Inspector shall not, without the sanction in writing of his official superior, disclose to any person any information acquired by him in the course of his official duties.

54. Form of order not to dispose of stock.
An order in writing by an Inspector under clause (c) of section 22 of the Act requiring a person not to dispose of any stock in his possession shall be in Form 15.

1[54A. Prohibition of sale. No person in possession of a drug 2[or cosmetic] in respect of which an Inspector has made an order under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 22 of the Act shall in contravention of that order sell or otherwise dispose of any stock of such drug 2[or cosmetic].

3[55. Forms of receipts for seized drug, cosmetic, record register, document or any other material object.-- A receipt by an Inspector for the stock of any drug or cosmetic or for any record, register, document or any other material object seized by him under clause (c) or clause (cc) of sub-section (1) of section 22 of the Act shall be in Form 16.]

4[55A. Manner of certifying copies of seized documents.—The Drugs Inspector shall return the documents , seized by him under clause (cc) or produced before him under clause (cca), of sub-section (1) of section 22 of the Act, within a period of twenty days of the date of such seizure or production, to the person from whom they have seized or, as the case may be, the person who produced them, after copies thereof of extracts therefrom have been signed by the concerned Drug Inspector and the person from whom they have seized , or, as the case may be , who produced such records.]

56. Form of intimation of purpose of taking samples. When an Inspector takes a sample of a drug for the purpose of test or analysis, he shall intimate such purpose in writing in Form 17 to the person from whom he takes it.

5[56A. Form or receipt for samples of drugs where fair price tendered is refused.—Where the fair price, for the samples of drugs taken for the purpose of test or analysis, tendered under sub-section (1) of section 23 has been refused, the Inspector shall tender a receipt therefor to the person from whom the said samples have been taken as specified in Form 17A.]

57. Procedure for despatch of sample to Government Analyst. (1) The portion of sample or the container sent by an Inspector to the Government Analyst for test or analysis under sub-section (4) of section 23 of the Act shall be sent by registered post or by hand in a sealed packet, enclosed together with a memorandum in Form 18, in an outer cover addressed to the Government Analyst.

(2) A copy of the memorandum and a specimen impression of the seal used to seal the packet shall be sent to the Government Analyst separately by registered post or by hand.

1. Ins. by No. F. 1-19/59-D, dt. 13-6-1961.
3. Subs. by G.S.R. No. 926 dt. 16-7-1977.

1[58. Confiscation of drugs, implements, machinery etc. (1) Where any person has

been convicted for contravening any of the provisions of Chapter IV of the Act or any Rule made thereunder, the stock of the drug in respect of which the contravention has been made shall be liable to confiscation.

(2) Where any person has been convicted for the manufacture of any drug deemed to be misbranded under clause (a), clause (b), clause (c), clause (d), clause (f) or clause (g) of section 17 of the Act, or adulterated drug under section 17B of the Act, or for manufacture for sale, or stocking or exhibiting for sale or distribution of any drug without a valid licence as required under clause (c) of section 18 of the Act, any implements or machinery used in such manufacture, sale or distribution and any receptacle, packages, or coverings in which such drug is contained and the animals, vehicles, vessels or other conveyances used in carrying such drug shall also be liable to confiscation.]

2[58A. Procedure for disposal of confiscated drugs.
(1) The Court shall refer

the confiscated drugs to the Inspector concerned for report as to whether they are of standard quality or contravene the provisions of the Act or the Rules in any respect.

(2) If the Inspector, on the basis of Government Analyst‘s report finds the confiscated drugs to be not of standard quality or to contravene any of the provisions of the Act or the Rules made thereunder, he shall report to the Court accordingly. The Court shall thereupon order the destruction of the drugs. The destruction shall take place under the supervision of the Inspector in the presence of such authority, if any, as may be specified by the Court.

(3) If the Inspector finds that the confiscated drugs are of standard quality and do not contravene the provisions of the Act or the Rules made thereunder, he shall report to the Court accordingly. 3[The Court may then order the Inspector to give the stocks of confiscated drugs to hospital or dispensary maintained or supported by the Government or by Charitable Institutions].]

1. Subs. by S. O. 289, dt. 3-2-1973.
2. Ins. by No. F. 1-9/62-D (GSR 6), dt. 2-12-1964.

PART VI

SALE OF DRUGS OTHER THAN HOMOEOPATHIC MEDICINES

59. (1) The State Government shall appoint Licensing Authorities for the purpose of this Part for such areas as may be specified.

1[(2) Applications for the grant or renewal of a licence 2[to sell, stock, exhibit or offer for sale or distribute] drugs, other than those included in Schedule X, 3[shall be made in Form 19 accompanied by a fee of rupees one thousand and five hundred or Form 19A accompanied by a fee of rupees five hundred, as the case may be, or in the case of drugs included in Schedule X shall be made in Form 19C accompanied by a fee of rupees five hundred, to the licensing authority:]

Provided that in the case of an itinerant vendor or an applicant who desires to establish a shop in a village or town having population of 5,000 or less, the application in Form 19-A shall be accompanied by a fee of rupees ten .

(3) 3[A fee of rupees one hundred and fifty] shall be paid for a duplicate copy of a licence 2[to sell, stock, exhibit or offer for sale or distribute] drugs, other than those included in Schedule X, or for a licence 2[to sell, stock, exhibit or offer for sale or distribute] drugs, included in Schedule X, if the original is defaced, damaged or lost:

Provided that in the case of itinerant vendor or an applicant who desires to establish a shop in a village or town having a population of 5,000 or less, the fee for a duplicate copy of a licence if the original is defaced, damaged or lost, shall be rupees two.

(4) Application for renewal of a licence 2[to sell, stock, exhibit or offer for sale or distribute] drugs, after its expiry but within six months of such expiry 3[shall be accompanied by a fee of rupees one thousand and five hundred plus an additional fee at the rate of rupees five hundred per month or part thereof in Form 19, rupees five hundred plus an additional fee at the rate of rupees two hundred and fifty per month or part thereof in Form 19-A and rupees five hundred plus an additional fee at the rate of rupees two hundred and fifty per month or part thereof in Form 19C:]

Provided that in the case of an itinerant vendor or an applicant desiring to open a shop in a village or town having a population of 5,000 or less the application for such renewal shall be accompanied by a fee of rupees ten, plus an additional fee at the rate of rupees eight per month or part thereof.]

1[60. A licensing authority may with the approval of the State Government by an order in writing delegate the power to sign licences and such other powers as may be specified in the order to any other person under his control.]

2[61. Forms of licences to sell drugs.
(1) a licence 3[ to sell, stock, exhibit or offer for sale or distribute] drugs other than those specified in Schedules C, C (1) and X and by retail on restricted licence or by wholesale, shall be issued in Form 20, Form 20A or Form 20B, as the case may be:

Provided that a licence in Form 20A shall be valid for only such drugs as are specified in the licence.

(2) A licence 3[to sell, stock, exhibit or offer for sale or distribute] drugs specified in Schedule C and C (1) excluding those specified in Schedule X, by retail on restricted licence or by wholesale shall be issued in Form 21, Form 21A or Form 21B, as the case may be:

4[Provided that a licence in Form 21A shall not be granted for drugs specified in Schedules C and shall be valid for only such Schedule C (1) drugs as are specified in the licence.]

(3 )A licence 3[to sell, stock, exhibit or offer for sale or distribute] drugs specified in Schedule X by retail or by wholesale shall be issued in Form 20F or Form 20G as the case may be.]

62. Sale at more than one place.
If drugs are sold or stocked for sale at more than one place, separate application shall be made, and a separate licence shall be issued, in respect of each such place:

5[Provided that this shall not apply to itinerant vendors who have no specified place of business and who will be licensed to conduct business in a particular area within the jurisdiction of the licensing authority.]

1. Amended by F. 1-16/57-D, dt. 15-6-1957.
5. Added by Notfn. No. F. 10-21/49-D, dt. 10-3-1953.

1[62A. Restricted licences in Forms 20A and 21A.
(a) Restricted licences in Forms 20A and 21A shall be issued subject to the discretion of the Licensing Authority, to dealers or persons in respect of drugs whose sale does not require the supervision of a qualified person.

(b) Licences to itinerant vendors shall be issued only in exceptional circumstances for bona fide travelling agents of firms dealing in drugs or for a vendor who purchases drugs from a licensed dealer for distribution in sparsely populated rural areas where other channels of distribution of drugs are not available.

(c) The licensing authority may issue a licence in Form 21A to a travelling agent of a firm but to no other class of itinerant vendors for the specific purpose of distribution to medical practitioners or dealers, samples of biological and other special products specified in Schedule C:

Provided that travelling agents of licensed manufacturers, agents, of such manufacturers and importers of drugs shall be exempted from taking out licence for the free distribution of samples of medicines among members of the medical profession, hospitals, dispensaries and the medical institution or research institutions.

1[62-B. Conditions to be satisfied before a licence in Form 20A or Form 21A is granted.
(1) A licence in Form 20A or Form 21A shall not be granted to any person, unless the authority empowered to grant the licence is satisfied that the premises in respect of which the licence is to be granted are adequate and equipped with proper storage accommodation for preserving the properties of drugs to which the licence applies:

Provided that this condition shall not apply in the case of licence granted to itinerant vendors.

(2) In granting a licence under Rule 62A the authority empowered to grant it shall have regard to:

(i) the number of licences granted in the locality during one year immediately preceding; and

(ii) the occupation, trade or business carried on by such applicant :

1. Ins. by Notfn. No. F. 1-9/60-D, dt. 3-7-1961.

Provided that the licensing authority may refuse to grant or renew a licence to any applicant or licensee in respect of whom it is satisfied that by reason of his conviction of an offence under the Act or these Rules or the previous cancellation or suspension of any licence granted thereunder, he is not a fit person to whom a licence should be granted under this rule.

(3) Any person who is aggrieved by the order passed by the licensing authority in sub-rule (1) may, within 30 days from the date of the receipt of such order appeal to the State Government and the State Government may, after such enquiry into the matter as it considers necessary and after giving the appellant an opportunity for representing his views in the matter make such order in relation thereto as it thinks fit.]

1[62C. Application for licence to sell drugs by wholesale or to distribute the same from a motor vehicle. (1) Application for the grant or renewal of a licence to sell by wholesale or to distribute from a motor vehicle shall be made to the Licensing Authority in Form 19AA and shall be accompanied by 2[a fee of rupees five hundred]:

Provided that if the applicant applies for the renewal of a licence after its expiry but within six months of such expiry , the fee payable for renewal of such licence shall be 2[rupees five hundred plus an additional fee at the rate of rupees two hundred and fifty per month or part thereof].

(2) A fee of 2[rupees one hundred and fifty] shall be paid for a duplicate copy of a licence issued under this rule, if the original is defaced, damaged or lost.]

3[62D. Form of licences to sell drugs by wholesale or distribute drugs from a motor vehicle. A licence shall be issued for sale by wholesale or for distribution from a motor vehicle of drugs other than those specified in Schedule and Schedule C(1) in Form 20BB and of drugs specified in Schedule C and Schedule C(1) in Form 21BB :

Provided that such a licence shall not be required in a case where a public carrier or a hired vehicle is used for transportation or distribution of drug.]

3[63. Duration of licence.
An original licence or a renewed licence to sell drugs, unless sooner suspended or cancelled, shall be 2[valid for a period of five years on and from the date on which] it is granted or renewed:

1. Ins. by Notfn. No. 1-9/60-D dt. 3-7-1961.
2. Subs. by Notfn. No. G.S.R 601 (E), dt. 24-8-2001.
3. Amended by Notfn. No. F. 1-10/62-D, dt. 10-4-1964.

1[Provided that if the application for renewal of licence in force is made before its expiry or if the application is made within six months of its expiry, after payment of additional fee, the licence shall continue to be in force until orders are passed on the application. The licence shall be deemed to have expired if application for its renewal is not made within six months after its expiry].] 2[63A. Certificate of renewal of a sale licence. The certificate of renewal of a sale licence in Forms 20, 20A, 20B,3[20F, 20G], 21, 21A and 21B shall be issued in Form 21C.] 4[63B. Certificate of renewal of licence. A certificate of renewal of a licence in Form 20BB or Form 21BB shall be issued in Form 21CC.]

5[64. Conditions to be satisfied before a licence in Form 8[20, 20B, 20F,20G, 21 or 21B] is granted .
(1)A licence in Form 3[20, 20B, 20F, 20G, 21 or 21B] 6[to sell, stock, exhibit or offer for sale or distribute] drugs shall not be granted 7[or renewed] to any person unless the authority empowered to grant the licence is satisfied that the premises in respect of which the licence is to be granted 7[or renewed] are adequate, equipped with proper storage accommodation for preserving the properties of the drugs to which the licence applies and are in charge of a person competent in the opinion of the licensing authority to supervise and control the sale, distribution and preservation of drugs :

Provided that in the case of a pharmacy a licence in Form 20 or 21 shall not be granted 7[or renewed] unless the licensing authority is satisfied that the requirements prescribed for a pharmacy in Schedule N have been complied with:

3[Provided further that licence in Form 20F shall be granted 7[or renewed] only to a pharmacy and in areas where a pharmacy is not operating, such licence may be 7[granted or renewed] to a chemist and druggist.] Explanation. For the purpose of this rule the term ̳Pharmacy‘ shall be held to mean to include every store or shop or other place : (1) where drugs are dispensed, that is, measured or weighed or made up and supplied ; or (2) where prescriptions are compounded; or (3) where drugs are prepared; or (4) which has upon it or displayed within it, or affixed to or used in connection with it, a sign bearing the word or words ―Pharmacy‖, ―Pharmacist‖, ―Dispensing Chemist‖ or ―Pharmaceutical Chemist‖; or (5) which, by sign, symbol or indication within or upon it gives the impression that the operations mentioned at (1), (2) and (3) are carried out in the premises; or (6) which is advertised in terms referred to in (4) above.

1. Amended by S. O. No. 2139, dt. 12-8-1972.
2. Ins. by Notfn. No. F. 1-10/62-D, dt. 10-4-1964.
4. Ins. by Notfn. No. F.1-10/62-D,dt. 10-4-1964.
5. Subs. by Notfn. No.F.1-16/57-D,dt. 15-6-1957 and No. F. 1-19/59-D, dt. 13-6-1961.
7. Subs. by No. G.S.R 681(E), dt. 6-6-1988.

(2) In granting 1[or renewing] a licence under sub-rule (1) the authority empowered to grant it shall have regard

2[(i) to the average number of licences granted 1[or renewed] during the period of 3 years immediately preceding, and]

(ii) to the occupation, trade or business ordinarily carried on by such applicant during the period aforesaid:

Provided that the licensing authority may refuse to grant or renew a licence to any applicant or licensee in respect of whom it is satisfied that by reason of his conviction of an offence under the Act or these rules, or the previous cancellation or suspension of any licence granted 1[or renewed] thereunder, he is not a fit person to whom a licence should be granted 1[or renewed] under this rule. Every such order shall be communicated to the licensee as soon as possible:

3[Provided further that in respect of an application for the grant of a licence in Form 20B or Form 21B or both, the licensing authority shall satisfy himself that the premises in respect of which a wholesale licence is to be granted 1[or renewed] are:-

(i) of an area of not less than ten square meters; and]

4[(ii) in the charge of a competent person, who— (a) is a Registered Pharmacist, or (b) has passed the matriculation examination or its equivalent examination from a recognised Board with four years‘ experience in dealing with sale of drugs, or

(c) holds a degree of a recognised University with one year‘s experience in dealing with drugs:]

5[Provided also that,- (i) in respect of an application for the grant of a licence in Form 20 or Form 21 or both, the licensing authority shall satisfy itself that the premises are of an area] of not less than 10 square meters, and

(ii) in respect of an application for the grant of a licence (A) In Form 20 or Form 21 or both, and (B) In Form 20 B or Form 21B or both, the licensing authority shall satisfy itself that the premises are of an area not less than 15 square meters:

1. Ins. by G.S.R 681(E), dt. 6.6.1988.
3. Ins. by G.S.R 681(E), dt. 6.6.1980.
4. Substituted. G.S.R 351(E), dt. 26-4-2000.

Provided also that the provisions of the preceding proviso shall not apply to the premises for which licences have been issued by the licensing authority before the commencement of the Drugs and Cosmetics (1st Amendment) Rules, 1997.]

1[(3) Any person who is aggrieved by the order passed by the licensing authority in sub-Rule (1) may, within 30 days from the date of receipt of such order, appeal to the State Government and the State Government may, after such enquiry into the matter as it considers necessary and after giving the appellant an opportunity for representing his views in the matter, make such an order in relation thereto as it thinks fit.]
65. Condition of licences.
Licences in 2[Forms 20, 20-A, 20-B, 20-F, 20-G, 21 and 21-B] shall be subject to the conditions stated therein and to the following general conditions

2[(1) Any drug shall, if compounded or made on the licensee‘s premises be compounded or made by or under the direct and personal supervision of a 3[registered Pharmacist].]

(2) The supply, otherwise than by way of wholesale dealing, 4[* * *] of any drug supplied on the prescription of a Registered Medical Practitioner shall be effected only by or under the personal supervision of a 3[registered Pharmacist].

5[(3) (1) The supply of any drug 6[other than those specified in Schedule X] on a prescription of a Registered Medical Practitioner shall be recorded at the time of supply in a prescription register specially maintained for the purpose and the serial number of the entry in the register shall be entered on the prescription. The following particulars shall be entered in the register:_

(a) serial number of the entry,

(b) the date of supply,

(c) the name and address of the prescriber,

7[(d) the name and address of the patient, or the name and address of the owner of the animal if the drug supplied is for veterinary use,

(e) the name of the drug or preparation and the quantity or in the case of a medicine made up by the licensee, the ingredients and quantities thereof, (f) in the case of a drug specified in 2[Schedule C or 8[Schedule H and Schedule H1]] the name of the manufacturer of the drug, its batch number and the date of expiry of potency, if any, (g) the signature of the 3[registered Pharmacist] by or under whose supervision the medicine was made up or supplied:

1. Amended by F.1-9/60-D dt. 3-7-1961.
4. Omitted by No. G.S.R 462(E), dt. 22-6-1982.
5. Subs. by S. O. 2139, dt. 5-6-1972.
7. Subs. by G.S.R. 926 dt. 16-7-1977.

Provided that in the case of drugs which are not compounded in the premises and which are supplied from or in the original containers, the particulars specified in items (a) to (g) above may be entered in a cash or credit memo book, serially numbered and specially maintained for this purpose:

Provided further that if the medicine is supplied on a prescription on which the medicine has been supplied on a previous occasion and entries made in the prescription register, it shall be sufficient if the new entry in the register includes a serial number, the date of supply, the quantity supplied and a sufficient reference to an entry in the register recording the dispensing of the medicine on the previous occasion:

Provided also that it shall not be necessary to record the above details in the register or in the cash or credit memo particulars in respect of− (i) any drugs supplied against prescription under the Employees State Insurance Scheme if all the above particulars are given in that prescription, and

(ii) any drug other than that specified in 1[Schedule C or 4[Schedule H and Schedule H1]] if it is supplied in the original unopened container of the manufacturer and if the prescription is duly stamped at the time of supply with the name of the supplier and the date on which the supply was made and on condition that the provisions of sub-rule (4)(3) of this rule are complied with.
5[(h) the supply of a drug specified in Schedule H1 shall be recorded in a separate register at the time of the supply giving the name and address of the prescriber, the name of the patient, the name of the drug and the quantity supplied and such records shall be maintained for three years and be open for inspection.] (2) The option to maintain a prescription register or a cash or credit memo book in respect of drugs and medicines which are supplied from or in the original container, shall be made in writing to the Licensing Authority at the time of application for the grant or renewal of the licence to sell by retail:
Provided that the Licensing Authority may require records to be maintained only in prescription register if it is satisfied that the entries in the carbon copy of the cash or credit memo book are not legible.] 2[(4) (1) The supply by retail, otherwise than on a prescription of a drug specified in Schedule C 3[* * *] shall be recorded at the time of supply either−

3. Omitted by G.S.R 462 (E), dt. 22-6-1982.

(i) in a register specially maintained for the purpose in which the following particulars shall be entered :

(a) serial number of the entry,

(b) the date of supply,

(c) the name and address of the purchaser,

(d) the name of the drug and the quantity thereof,

(e) in the case of a drug specified in Schedule C, the name of the manufacturer, the batch number and the date of expiry of potency,

(f) the signature of the person under whose supervision the sale was effected, or

(ii) in a cash or credit memo book, serially numbered containing all the particulars specified in items (b) to (f) of sub-clause (i) above.

NOTE: The entries in the carbon copy of the cash or credit memo which is retained by the licensee shall be maintained in a legible manner.

(2) The option to maintain a register or a cash or credit memo book shall be made in writing to the Licensing Authority at the time of application for the grant or renewal of a licence to sell by retail:

Provided that the Licensing Authority may require records to be maintained in a register if it is satisfied that the entries in the carbon copy of the cash/credit memo book are not legible.

(3)(i) The supply by retail of any drug shall be made against a cash/credit memo which shall contain the following particulars :

(a) Name, address and sale licence number of the dealer,

1[(b) Serial number of the cash/credit memo,

(c) the name and quantity of the drug supplied.]

(ii) Carbon copies of cash/credit memos shall be maintained by the licensee as record.

1. Ins. by G. S. R. No. 245, dt. 21-2-1976.

1[(4)(i) Records of purchase of a drug intended for sale or sold by retail shall be maintained by the licensee and such records shall show the following particulars, namely:

(a) the date of purchase,

(b) the name and address of the person from whom purchased and the number of the relevant licence held by him,

(c) the name of the drug, the quantity and the batch number, and

(d) the name of the manufacturer of the drug.

(ii) Purchase bills including cash or credit memo shall be serially numbered by the licensee and maintained by him in a chronological order.]

2[(5)(1) Subject to the other provisions of these Rules the supply of a drug by wholesale shall be made against a cash or credit memo bearing the name and address of the licensee and his licence number under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act in which the following particulars shall be entered

(a) the date of sale,

(b) the name, address of the licensee to whom sold and his sale licence number. In case of sale to an authority purchasing on behalf of Government, or to a hospital, medical, educational or research institution or to a Registered Medical Practitioner for the purpose of supply to his patients the name and address of the authority, institution or the Registered Medical Practitioner as the case may be,

(c) the name of the drug, the quantity and the batch number, (d) the name of the manufacturer, 3[(e) the signature of the competent person under whose supervision the sale was effected.]

(2) Carbon copies of cash or credit memos specified in clause (1) shall be preserved as records for a period of three years from the date of the sale of the drug.

2. Amended by F. 1-63/62-D, dt. 17-7-1963.

1[(3) (i) Records of purchase of a drug intended for resale or sold by wholesale shall be maintained by the licensee and such records shall show the following particulars, namely:-

(a) the date of purchase,

(b) the name, address and the number of the relevant licence held by the person from whom purchased,

(c) the name of the drug, the quantity and the batch number, and

(d) the name of the manufacturer of the drug.

(ii) Purchase bills including cash or credit memos shall be serially numbered by the licensee and maintained by him in a chronological order.]

(6) The licensee shall produce for inspection by an Inspector appointed under the Act on demand all registers and records maintained under these Rules, and shall supply to the Inspector such information as he may require for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of the Act and Rules thereunder have been observed.

(7) Except where otherwise provided in these Rules, all registers and records maintained under these Rules shall be preserved for a period of not less than two years from the date of the last entry therein.

(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Rule it shall not be necessary to record particulars in a register specially maintained for the purpose if the particulars are recorded in any other register specially maintained under any other law for the time being in force.

2[(9) (a) Substances specified in 3[Schedule H and Schedule H1] or Schedule X shall not be sold by retail except on and in accordance with the prescription of a Registered Medical Practitioner and in the case of substances specified in Schedule X, the prescriptions shall be in duplicate, one copy of which shall be retained by the licensee for a period of two years.

(b) The supply of drugs specified in 3[Schedule H and Schedule H1] or Schedule X to Registered Medical Practitioners, Hospitals, Dispensaries and Nursing Homes shall be made only against the signed order in writing which shall be preserved by the licensee for a period of two years.]

(10) For the purposes of clause (9) a prescription shall

(a) be in writing and be signed by the person giving it with his usual signature and be dated by him;

1[(b) specify the name and address of the person for whose treatment it is given, or the name and address of the owner of the animal if the drug is meant for veterinary use;]

(c) indicate the total amount of the medicine to be supplied and the dose to be taken.

(11) The person dispensing a prescription containing a drug specified in 5[Schedule H and Schedule H1] 2[and Schedule X] shall comply with the following requirements in addition to other requirement of these rules.

(a) the prescription must not be dispensed more than once unless the prescriber has stated thereon that it may be dispensed more than once;

(b) if the prescription contains a direction that it may be dispensed a stated number of times or at stated intervals it must not be dispensed otherwise than in accordance with the directions;

(c) at the time of dispensing there must be noted on the prescription above the signature of the prescriber the name and address of the seller and the date on which the prescription is dispensed.

4[(11-A) No person dispensing a prescription containing substances specified in 3[5[Schedule H and Schedule H1] or X], may supply any other preparation, whether containing the same substance or not, in lieu thereof.

3[(12) Substances specified in Schedule X kept in retail shop or premises used in connection therewith shall be stored—

(a) under lock and key in cupboard or drawer reserved solely for the storage of these substances; or

(b) in a part of the premises separated from the remainder of the premises and to which only responsible persons have access;]

1. Subs. by G. S. R. No. 926, dt. 24-6-1977.
3. Subs., by G.S.R 462 (E), dt. 22-6-1982.
4. Ins. by SO 2139, dt. 5-6-1972.

1 [* * * * *]

2[(15)(a) The description ―Drugstore‖ shall be displayed by such licensees who do not require the services of a 3[Registered Pharmacist].

(b) The description ―Chemists and Druggists‖ shall be displayed by such licensees who employ the services of a 3[Registered Pharmacist] but who do not maintain a ―Pharmacy‖ for compounding against prescriptions.

(c) The description ―Pharmacy‖, ―Pharmacist‖, ―Dispensing Chemist‖ or ―Pharmaceutical Chemist‖ shall be displayed by such licensees who employ the services of a 3[Registered Pharmacist] and maintain a ―Pharmacy‖ for compounding against prescriptions:

3[Explanation:- For the purpose of this rule,-

(i) ―Registered Pharmacist‖ means a person who is a registered Pharmacist as defined in clause (i) of section (2) of the Pharmacy Act, 1948 (Act No. 8 of 1948):

Provided that the provisions of sub-clause (i) shall not apply to those persons who are already approved as ―qualified person‖ by the licensing authority on or before 31st December, 1969:

(ii) ―Date of Expiry of potency‖ means the date that is recorded on the container, label or wrapper as the date up to which the substance may be expected to retain a potency not less than or not to acquire a toxicity greater than that required or permitted by the prescribed test].]

4[(16) The licensee shall maintain an Inspection Book in Form 35 to enable an

Inspector to record his impressions and the defects noticed.]

1. Sub-Rules (13) and (14) omitted by G.S.R 462 (E), dt. 22-6-1982.
4. Subs. by Notfn. No. F. 1-14/68-D dt. 26-10-1968.

1[(17) No drug shall be sold or stocked by the licensee after the date of expiration of potency recorded on its container, label or wrapper, or in violation of any statement or direction recorded on such container, label or wrapper:

Provided that any such drugs in respect of which the licensee has taken steps with the manufacturer or his representative for the withdrawal, reimbursement or disposal of the same, may be stocked after the date of expiration of potency pending such withdrawal, reimbursement or disposal, as the case may be, subject to the condition that the same shall be stored separately from the trade stocks 2[and all such drugs shall be kept in packages or cartons, the top of which shall display prominently, the words ―Not for sale‖].]

3[(18) No drug intended for distribution to the medical profession as free sample which bears a label on the container as specified in clause 4[(ix)] of sub-rule (1) of rule 96, and no drug meant for consumption by the Employees‘ State Insurance Corporation, the Central Government Health Scheme, the Government Medical Stores Depots, the Armed Forces Medical Stores or other Government institutions, which bears a distinguishing mark or any inscription on the drug or on the label affixed to the container thereof indicating this purpose shall be sold or stocked by the licensee on his premises:]

5[Provided that this sub-rule shall not be applicable to licensees who have been appointed as approved chemists, by the State Government in writing, under the employees‘ State Insurance Scheme, or have been appointed as authorised agent or distributor, by the manufacturer in writing, for drugs meant for consumption under the Central Government Health Scheme, the Government Medical Stores Depots, the Armed Forces Medical Stores or other Government Institutions for drugs meant for consumption under those schemes 6[or have been appointed as authorised Depots or Carrying and Forwarding agent by the manufacturer in writing, for storing free samples meant for distribution to medical profession] subject to the conditions that the stock shall be stored separately from the trade stocks and shall maintain separate records of the stocks received and distributed by them.]

1. Ins. by Notfn. No. F. 1-55/61-D, dt. 22-8-1964.
2. Ins. by S. O. No. 903, dt. 28-2-1976.
4. Subs. by G.S.R. 676(E) dt. 6-9-1994.
5. Subs. by G.S.R. 496(E) dt. 9-6-1995.

1[(19) The supply by retail of any drug in a container other than the one in which the manufacturer has marketed the drug, shall be made only by dealers who employ the services of a 2[Registered Pharmacist] and such supply shall be made under the direct supervision of the 2[Registered Pharmacist] in an envelope or other suitable wrapper or container showing the following particulars on the label:

(a) name of the drug,

(b) the quantity supplied,

(c) the name and address of the dealer.]

3[(20) The medicines for treatment of animals kept in a retail shop or premises shall be labelled with the words ̳Not for human use and shall be stored for treatment of animals only‘

(a) in a cupboard or drawer reserved solely for the storage of veterinary drugs, or

(b) in a part of the premises separated from the remainder of the premises to which customers are not permitted to have access.] 4[(21) (a) The supply of drugs specified in Schedule X shall be recorded at the time of supply in a register (bound and serially page numbered) specially maintained for the purpose and separate pages shall be allotted for each drug.

(b) The following particulars shall be entered in the said register, namely:-- (i) Date of transaction;
(ii) Quantity received, if any, the name and address of the supplier and the number of the relevant licence held by the supplier;

(iii) Name of the drug;
(iv) Quantity supplied;
(v) Manufacturer‘s name;
(vi) Batch No. or Lot No;
(vii) Name and address of the patient/purchaser;

(viii) Reference Number of the prescription against which supplies were made;

(ix) Bill No and date in respect of purchases and supplies made by him;

(x) Signature of the person under whose supervision the drugs have been supplied.]

1. Ins. by G. S. R. 444 dt. 28-4-1973.
3. Added by G. S. R. No. 926 dt. 16-7-1977.

1[65A. Additional information to be furnished by an applicant for liscence or a licensee to the Licensing Authority. The applicant for the grant of a licence or any person granted a licence under this Part shall, on demand, furnish to the licensing authority, before the grant of the licence or during the period the licence is in force, as the case may be, documentary evidence in respect of the ownership of occupation or rental or other basis of the premises, specified in the application for licence or in the licence granted, constitution of the firm, or any other relevant matter which may be required for the purpose of verifying the correctness of the statements made by the applicant or the licensee, while applying for or after obtaining the licence, as the case may be.]

66. Cancellation and suspension of licences.
(1) The Licensing Authority may, after giving the licensee an opportunity to show cause why such an order should not be passed by an order in writing stating the reasons therefor, cancel a licence issued under this Part or suspend it for such period as he thinks fit, either wholly or in respect of some of the substances to which it relates, if in his opinion, the licensee has failed to comply with any of the conditions of the licence or with any provisions of the Act or Rules thereunder:

1[Provided that, where such failure or contravention is the consequence of an act or omission on the part of an agent or employee, the licence shall not be cancelled or suspended if the licensee proves to the satisfaction of the licensing authority−

(a) that the act or omission was not instigated or connived at by him or, if the licensee is a firm or company, by a partner of the firm or a director of the company, or

(b) that he or his agent or employee had not been guilty of any similar act or omission within twelve months before the date on which the act or omission in question took place, or where his agent or employee had been guilty of any such act or omission the licensee had not or could not reasonably have had, knowledge of that previous act or omission, or

(c) if the act or omission was a continuing act or omission, he had not or could not reasonably have had knowledge of that previous act or omission, or

(d) that he had used due diligence to ensure that the conditions of the licence or the provisions of the Act or the Rules thereunder were observed.] 2[(2) A licensee whose licence has been suspended or cancelled may, within three months of the date of order under sub-rule (1), prefer an appeal against that order to the State Government, which shall decide the same.] 3[66A. Procedure for disposal of drugs in the event of cancellation of licence.— (1) In case a licensee, whose licence has been cancelled, desires to dispose of the drugs he has in his possession in the premises in respect of which the licence has been cancelled, he shall apply in writing to the licensing authority for this purpose, giving the following particulars, namely:—

1. Ins. by S. O. 2139, dt. 12-8-1972.
2. Subs. by G. S. R. 926 dt. 16-7-1977.

(a) the name and address of the person to whom the drugs are proposed to be sold or supplied together with the number of the licence for sale or manufacture, as the case may be, held by him,

(b) the names of drugs together with their quantities, batch numbers, the names and addresses of their manufacturers and the dates of their expiry, if any, proposed to be sold to the person mentioned in clause (a).

(2) The licensing authority may, after examination of the particulars referred to in sub-rule (1) and, if necessary, after inspection by an Inspector of the premises where the drugs are stocked, grant the necessary permission for their disposal.]

6[****] 1[PART VIA

SALE OF HOMOEOPATHIC MEDICINES

67A. (1) The State Government shall appoint Licensing Authorities for the purpose of this Part for such areas as may be specified.

(2) Application for the grant or renewal of a licence 2[to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale or distribute] Homoeopathic medicines shall be made in Form 19-B to the Licensing Authority and shall be accompanied by a 3[fee of rupees two hundred and fifty]:

4[Provided that if the applicant applies for renewal of licence after its expiry but within six months of such expiry the fee payable for renewal of such licence shall be 3[rupees two hundred and fifty plus an additional fee at the rate of rupees fifty or part thereof].

5[(3) If the original licence is either defaced, damaged or lost, a duplicate copy thereof may be issued on payment of a 3[fee of rupees fifty].]

67B. A Licensing Authority may, with the approval of the State Government, by an order in writing, delegate the power to sign licences and such other powers, as may be specified, to any other person under his control.

67C. Forms of licences to sell drugs. (1) A licence 2[to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale or distribute] Homoeopathic medicines by retail or by wholesale shall be issued in Form 20C or 20D as the case may be.

1. Added by Notfn. No. F. 1-35/64-D, dt. 18-8-1964.
2. Subs. by G.S.R 788(E) dt. 10-10-1985.
4. Amended by S. O. 2139 dt. 12-8-1972.
5. Added by G. S. R. 665, dt. 28-5-77.
6. Rule 67 omitted by SO 289 (E), dt. 20-12-1972.

67D. Sale at more than one place.
If drugs are sold or stocked for sale at more than one place, a separate application shall be made and a separate licence shall be obtained in respect of each place.

67E. Duration of licences.
An original licence or a renewed licence unless it is sooner suspended or cancelled shall be 1[valid for a period of five years on and from the date on which] it is granted or renewed :

2[Provided that if the application for renewal of a licence in force is made before its expiry or if the application is made within six month of its expiry, after payment of additional fee, the licence shall continue to be in force until orders are passed on the application and the licence shall be deemed to have expired if application for its renewal is not made within six months after its expiry.]

3[67EE. Certificate of renewal.
The certificate of renewal of a sale licence in Forms 20C and 20D shall be issued in Form 20E.]

67F. Condition to be satisfied before a licence in Form 20C or Form 20D is granted.-(1) A licence in Form 20C or Form 20D to 4[to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale or distribute] Homoeopathic medicines shall not be granted to any person unless the authority empowered to grant the licence is satisfied that the premises in respect of which the licence is to be granted are clean and in the case of a licence in Form 20C the sale premises is in charge of a person who is or has been dealing in Homoeopathic medicines and who is in the opinion of the Licensing Authority competent to deal in Homoeopathic medicines:

5[Provided that no registered Homoeopathic medical practitioner who is practising Homoeopathy in the premises where Homoeopathic medicines are sold shall deal in Homoeopathic medicines.]

(2) Any person who is aggrieved by the order passed by the Licensing Authority under sub-rule (1) may within 30 days from the date of the receipt of such order appeal to the State Government and the State Government may, after such enquiry into the matter as it considers necessary and after giving the appellant an opportunity for representing his case, make such order in relation thereto as it thinks fit.

2. Subs. by S. O. 2139 dt. 5-6-1972.
3. Added by Notfn. No. F. 1-14/67-D, dt. the 3-2-1969.
5. Ins. by Notfn. No. G.S.R 680 (E), dt. 5-12-1980.

67G. Conditions of licence.
Licence in Form 20C or 20D shall be subject to the conditions stated therein and to the following further conditions, namely:

(1) The premises where the Homoeopathic medicines are stocked for sale or sold are maintained in a clean condition.

(2) The sale of Homoeopathic medicines shall be conducted under the supervision of a person, competent to deal in Homoeopathic medicines.

(3) The licensee shall permit an Inspector to inspect the premises and furnish such information as he may require for ascertaining whether the provisions of the Act and the Rules made thereunder have been observed.

(4) The licensee in Form 20D shall maintain records of purchase and sale of Homoeopathic medicines containing alcohol together with names and addresses of parties to whom sold.

1[(5) The licensee in Form 20C shall maintain records of purchase and sale of Homoeopathic medicines containing alcohol. No records of sale in respect of Homoeopathic potentised preparation in containers of 30 ml. or lower capacity and in respect of mother tinctures made up in quantities up to 60 ml.
need be maintained.]

2[(6) The licensee shall maintain an Inspection Book in Form 35 to enable an Inspector to record his impressions and the defects noticed.]

3[67GG. Additional information to be furnished by an applicant for licence or a licensee to the Licensing Authority.
The applicant for the grant of a licence or any person granted a licence under this Part shall, on demand furnish to the Licensing Authority, before the grant of the licence or during the period the licence is in force as the case may be, documentary evidence in respect of the ownership or occupation or rental or other basis of the premises, specified in the application for licence or in the licence granted, constitution of the firm, or any other relevant matter, which may be required for the purpose of verifying the correctness of the statements made by the applicant or the licensee, while applying for or after obtaining the licence, as the case may be.]

1. Ins. by Notfn. No. F. 1-59/68-D, dt. the 19-11-1969.
3. Ins. by S. O. 2139 dt. 5-6-1972.

67-H. Cancellation and suspension of licences. (1) The Licensing Authority

may, after giving the licensee an opportunity to show cause why such an order should not be passed by an order in writing stating the reasons therefor, cancel a licence issued under this Part or suspend it for such period as he thinks fit, if in his opinion, the licensee has failed to comply with any of the conditions of the licence or with any provisions of the Act or Rules made thereunder:

1[Provided that, where such failure or contravention is the consequence of an act or omission on the part of an agent or employee, the licence shall not be cancelled or suspended if the licensee proves to the satisfaction of the Licensing Authority−

(a) that the act or omission was not instigated or connived at by him or, if

the licensee is a firm or company, by a partner of the firm or a director of the company, or

(b) that he or his agent or employee had not been guilty of any similar act or omission within twelve months before the date on which the act or omission in question took place, or where his agent or employee had been guilty of any such act or omission, the licensee had not or could not reasonably have had, knowledge of that previous act or omission, or

(c) if the act or omission was a continuing act or omission that he had not or could not reasonably have had knowledge of that previous act or omission, or

(d) that he had used due diligence to ensure that the conditions of the licence or the provisions of the Act or the Rules thereunder were observed.]

2[(2) A licensee whose licence has been suspended or cancelled may, within three months of the date of the order under sub-rule (1), prefer an appeal against that order to the State Government, which shall decide the same.]

1. Ins. by S. O. 2139 dt. 5-6-1972.

PART VII

1[MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OR FOR DISTRIBUTION] OF DRUGS
OTHER THAN HOMOEOPATHIC MEDICINES
68. Manufacture on more than one set of premises.
If drugs are manufactured on more than one set of premises a separate application shall be made and a separate licence shall be issued in respect of each such set of premises.

2[68-A. Grant or Renewal of Licences by the Central Licence Approving Authority.— (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, on and from the commencement of the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Rules,1992, a licence for the manufacture for sale or distribution of drugs as specified from time to time by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette, for the purpose of this rule, shall be granted or renewed, as the case may be, by the Central Licence Approving Authority (appointed by the Central Government):]

Provided that the application for the grant or renewal of such licence shall be made to the Licensing Authority.

(2) On receipt of the application for grant or renewal of a licence, the licensing authority shall,-

(i) verify the statement made in the application form;

(ii) cause the manufacturing and testing establishment to be inspected in accordance with the provisions of rule 79; and

(iii) in case the application is for the renewal of licence, call for the information(s) of the past performance of the licensee.

(3) If the licensing authority is satisfied that the applicant is in a position to fulfil the requirements laid down as in these Rules, he shall prepare a report to that effect and forward it along with the application 3[and the licence (in triplicate) to be granted and renewed, duly completed] to the Central Licence Approving Authority:

Provided that if the licensing authority is of the opinion that the applicant is not in a position to fulfil the requirements laid down in these Rules, he may, by order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, refuse to grant or renew the licence, as the case may be.

(4) If on receipt of the application and the report of the licensing authority referred to in sub-rule (3) and after taking such measures including inspection of the premises by the Inspector, appointed by the Central Government under section 21 of the Act, with or without an expert in the concerned field if deemed necessary, the Central Licence Approving Authority, is satisfied that the applicant

is in a position to fulfil the requirements laid down in these Rules, he may grant or renew the licence, as the case may be:

Provided that if the Central Licence Approving Authority is of the opinion that the applicant is not in a position to fulfil the requirements laid down in these rules, he may, notwithstanding the report of the licensing authority, by order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, reject the application for grant or renewal of licence, as the case may be.]

1[68B. Delegation of Powers by the Central Licence Approving Authority.—The Central Licence Approving Authority may with the approval of the Central Government, by notification delegate his powers of signing licences and any other powers under the rules to any person under his control having same qualifications as prescribed for controlling authority under Rule 50A for such areas and for such periods as may be specified.]

2[69. Application for licence to manufacture drugs other than those specified in Schedules C and C(I) to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules. 3[(1) Application for grant or renewal of 4[licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution] of drugs, other than those specified in Schedules C and C(I) shall be made to the licensing authority appointed by the State Government for the purpose of this Part (hereinafter in this Part referred to as the licensing authority) and shall be made

(a) in the case of repacking of drugs excluding those specified in Schedule X for sale or distribution in, Form 24B;

(b) in the case of manufacture of drugs included in Schedule X, in Form 24F;

(c) in any other case, in Form 24.]

5[(2)(a) Every application in Form 24B shall be made up to ten items for each category of drugs categorised in Schedule M and shall be accompanied by a licence fee of rupees five hundred plus and an inspection fee of rupees two hundred for every inspection or for the purpose of renewal of the licence.

2. Amended by Notfn. F. 1-22/59-D, dt. 9-4-1960.
4 Subs. by G.S.R.788 (E), dt. 10-10-1985.

(b) Every application in Form 24F shall be made up to ten items for each category of drugs categorised in Schedule M and shall be accompanied by a licence fee of rupees six thousand and an inspection fee of rupees one thousand and five hundred for every subsequent inspection or for the purpose of renewal of licence.

(c) Every application in Form 24 shall be made up to ten items for each category of drugs 3[referred to in Schedule M relating to pharmaceuticals products and Schedule MIII relating to medical devices and in-vitro diagnostics] and shall be accompanied by a licence fee of rupees six thousand and an inspection fee of one thousand and five hundred for every inspection or for the purpose of renewal of the licence.]

1[(3) If a person applies for the renewal of a licence after the expiry thereof but within six months of such expiry the fee payable for the renewal of such licence shall be−]

2[(i) in the case of Form 24B a licence fee of rupees five hundred plus an additional fee at the rate of rupees two hundred and fifty per month or part thereof in addition to an inspection fee of rupees two hundred;

(ii) in the case of Form 24F a licence fee of rupees six thousand plus an additional fee at the rate of rupees one thousand per month or part thereof in addition to an inspection fee of rupees one thousand;

(iii) in the case of Form 24 a licence fee of rupees six thousand plus an additional fee at the rate of rupees one thousand per month or part thereof in addition to an inspection fee of rupees one thousand and five hundred.]

1[(4) A fee 2[rupees one thousand shall be paid] for a duplicate copy of the licence issued under clause (a), clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-Rule (1) if the original is defaced, damaged or lost.]

2[(5) Applications for manufacture of more than ten items of each category of drugs as categorized under Schedule M and M-III or for manufacture of additional items of drugs by licensees in Form 24 or Form 24F shall be accompanied by an additional fee at the rate of rupees three hundred for each additional item of drug.
Applications in Form 24B for licence to manufacture for sale and distribution for repacking for more than 10 items of each category or for manufacture of additional item of drug shall be accompanied by additional fee of rupees one hundred for each additional item of drugs as cetegorized in Schedule M and M-III].

1[(6) Where an application under this Rule is for the manufacture of drug formulations falling under the purview of new drug as defined in rule 122E, such application shall also be accompanied with approval, in writing in favour of the applicant, from the licensing authority as defined in clause (b) of rule 21.]

2[69A. Loan Licences.⎯3[(1) Application for the grant or renewal of loan licences to manufacture for sale or for distribution of drugs other than those specified in Schedule C, Schedule C (1) and Schedule X shall be made up to ten items for each category of drugs 5[referred to in Schedule M relating to pharmaceuticals products and Schedule M-III relating to medical devices and in-vitro diagnostics] and shall be made in Form 24A accompanied by a licence fee of rupees six thousand and an inspection fee of rupees one thousand and five hundred to the licensing authority:

Provided that if the applicant applies for the renewal of a licence after its expiry but within six months of such expiry, the fee payable for renewal of such licence shall be accompanied by a licence fee of rupees six thousand and an inspection fee of rupees one thousand and five hundred plus an additional fee at the rate of rupees one thousand per month or part thereof.] 4[Explanation.- For the purpose of this rule a loan licence means a licence which the Licensing Authority may issue to an applicant who does not have his own arrangements for manufacture but who intends to avail himself of the manufacturing facilities owned by a licensee in Form 25.]

(2) The Licensing Authority shall, before the grant of a loan licence, satisfy himself that the manufacturing unit has adequate equipment, staff, capacity for manufacture, and facilities for testing, to undertake the manufacture on behalf of the applicant for a loan licence.

3[(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2), application for manufacture of more than ten items for each category of drug on a loan licence shall be accompanied by an additional fee of rupees three hundred per additional item specified 5[referred to in Schedule M relating to pharmaceuticals products and Schedule MIII relating to medical devices and in-vitro diagnostics].

2. Amended by Notfn. No. F. 1-16/57-D, dt. 15-6- 1957.
3. Subs. by G.S.R 601(E) dt. 24-8-2001.
4. Subs. by G.S.R 724(E) dt. 07-11-2013.

1[(4) If the Licensing Authority is satisfied that a loan licence is defaced, damaged or lost or otherwise rendered useless, he may, on payment of a 2[fee of rupees one thousand] issue a duplicate licence.]

3[* * * * *]

4[70. Form of licence to repack or manufacture drugs other than those specified in Schedules C and C(1).- Licences for repacking of drugs against application in Form 24-B shall be granted in Form 25-B, licences for manufacture of drugs included in Schedule X and against application in Form 24-F shall be granted in Form 25-F and licences for manufacture of drugs against application in Form 24 shall be granted in Form 25.]

5[70A. Form of loan 6[licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution] of drugs other than those 7[specified in Schedules C, C(1) and X].⎯ A loan 6 [licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution] or drugs other than those 7[specified in Schedules C, C(1) and X] shall be issued in Form 25A.]

8[71. Conditions for the grant or renewal of a licence in Form 25 9[or Form 25F].⎯ Before a licence in Form 25 9[or Form 25F] is granted or renewed, the following conditions shall be complied with by the applicant.-

(1) The manufacture shall be conducted under the active direction and personal supervision of competent technical staff consisting at least of one person who is a whole-time employee and who is

(a) a graduate in Pharmacy or Pharmaceutical Chemistry of 10[a University established in India by law or has an equivalent qualification recognised and notified by the Central Government for such purpose] and has had at least eighteen months practical experience after the graduation in the manufacture of drugs. This period of experience may, however, be reduced by six months if the person has undergone training in manufacture of drugs for a period of six months during his University course; or

(b) a graduate in Science of 10[a University established in India by law or has an equivalent qualification recognized and notified by the Central Government for such purpose] who for the purpose of his degree has studied Chemistry as a principal subject and has

1. Ins. by Notfn. No. F.1-20/64-D, dt. 26.10.1968.
2. Subs. by Notfn. No. G.S.R. 601 (E), dt. 24.8.2001.
3. Rule 69 omitted by G.S.R. 944 (E), dt. 21-9-1988.
4. Subs. by Notfn. No. G.S.R. 462 (E), dt. 22.6.1982.
5. Ins. by Notfn. No. F.1-16/57 D, 15-6-1957 & No. F.1/22/59-D, dt. 9.4.1960.
6. Subs. by Notfn. No. G.S.R. 788 (E), dt. 10-10-1985.
7. Subs. by Notfn. No. G.S.R. 462 (E), dt. 22-6-1982.
8. Subs. by Notfn. No. F.1-16/57-D, dt. 15-6-1957.
10. Subs. by Notfn. No. G.S.R. 71 (E), dt. 30-1-1987.

had at least three years practical experience in the manufacture of drugs after his graduation; or

(c) a graduate in Chemical Engineering or Chemical Technology or Medicine of 1[a University established in India by law or has an equivalent qualification recognised and notified by the Central Government for such purpose] with general training and practical experience, extending over a period of not less than three years in the manufacture of drugs, after his graduation; or

2[(d) holding any foreign qualification the quality and content of training of which are comparable with those prescribed in clause (a), clause (b) or clause (c) and is permitted to work as competent technical staff under this Rule by the Central Government:]

Provided that any person who was immediately before the 29th June, 1957, actively directing and personally supervising the manufacture of drugs and whose name was accordingly entered in any licence granted in Form 25 3[or Form 25F] as it existed before the date shall be deemed to be qualified for the purposes of this rule:

4[Provided further that for drugs other than those specified in Schedules C, C(1) and X and meant for veterinary use, the whole-time employee under whose supervision the manufacture is conducted shall be a graduate in Veterinary Science or Pharmacy or General Science or Medicine of a University recognized by the Central Government and who has had at least three years practical experience in the manufacture of drugs excluding graduate in Pharmacy who shall have at least eighteen months practical experience in the manufacture of drugs:]

5[Provided 6[also] that the Licensing Authority may, in the matter of manufacture of disinfectant fluids, insecticides, liquid paraffin, medicinal gases, non-chemical contraceptives, plaster of Paris and surgical dressings, for the manufacture of which the knowledge of Pharmaceutical Chemistry or Pharmacy is not essential, permit the manufacture of the substance under the active direction and personal supervision of the competent technical staff, who, although not having any of the qualifications included in clause (a), (b) or (c) of this rule, has, in the opinion of the Licensing Authority, adequate experience in the manufacture of such substance.]

2. Added by Notfn. NO. F. 1-19/59-D, dt. 13-6-1961.
3. Ins. by. G.S.R. 462 (E), dt. 22-6-1982.
4. Ins. by. G.S.R. 93 (E), dt. 24-2-1999.
5. Added Notfn. No. F. 1-14/68-D, dt. the 26-10-1968.
6. Sub. by. G.S.R. 93 (E), dt. 24-2-1999.

(2) The factory premises shall comply with the conditions prescribed in Schedule M.

(3) The applicant shall provide adequate space, plant and equipment for the manufacturing operations; the space, plant and equipment recommended for various operations are given in Schedule M.

1[(4) The applicant shall provide and maintain adequate staff, premises and laboratory equipment for carrying out tests of the strength, quality and purity of the substances at a testing unit, which shall be separate from the manufacturing unit and the head of the testing unit shall be independent of the head of the manufacturing unit :

Provided that the manufacturing units, which, before the commencement of the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Rules, 1977, were making arrangements with institutions approved by the Licensing Authority for such tests to be carried out on their behalf may continue such arrangements up to the 30th June, 1977 :

Provided further that for tests requiring sophisticated instrumentation techniques or biological or microbiological methods other than sterility the Licensing Authority may permit such tests to be conducted by institutions approved by it 4 [ under Part XV(A) of these rules] for this purpose.]

2[(4A) The head of the testing unit referred to in condition (4) shall possess a degree in Medicine or Science or Pharmacy or Pharmaceutical Chemistry of a University recognized for this purpose and shall have experience in the testing of drugs, which in the opinion of the licensing authority is considered adequate.]

(5) The applicant shall make adequate arrangements for the storage of drugs manufactured by him.

3[(6) The applicant shall, while applying for a licence to manufacture patent or proprietary medicines, furnish to the Licensing Authority evidence and data justifying that the patent or proprietary medicines

(i) contain the constituent ingredients in therapeutic/prophylactic quantities as determined in relation to the claims or conditions for which the medicines are recommended for use or claimed to be useful;

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 926 dt. 16-7-1977.
3. Ins. by G.S.R. 515 dt. 10-4-1976.
4. Ins. by G.S.R. 1172 dt. 23-8-1977.

(ii) are safe for use in the context of the vehicles, excipients, additives and pharmaceutical aids used in the formulation and under the conditions in which the formulation for administration and use are recommended;

(iii) are stable under the conditions of storage recommended;

(iv) contain such ingredients and in such quantities for which there is therapeutic justification; and]

1[(v) have the approval, in writing, in favour of the applicant to manufacture drugs formulations falling under the purview of new drug as defined in Rule 122-E, from the Licensing Authority as defined in clause (b) of rule 21.]

2[(7) The licensee shall comply with the requirements of Good Manufacturing Practices as laid down in Schedule M.]

6[(8) The applicant shall make application for grant of licence for a drug formulation containing single active ingredient only in proper name.]

3[71A. Conditions for the grant or renewal of a licence in Form 25B. Before a licence in Form 25B is granted or renewed the following conditions shall be complied with by the applicant :- (1) the repacking operation shall be carried out under hygienic conditions and under the supervision of a competent person;

4[(2) the factory premises shall comply with the conditions prescribed in Schedule M; and]

5[(3) the applicant shall have adequate arrangements in his own premises for carrying out tests for the strength, quality and purity of the drugs at a testing unit which shall be separate from the repacking unit:]

6[(4) The application for grant of licence for a drug formulation containing single active ingredient shall be made only in proper name:]

Provided that the repacking units, which before the commencement of the Drugs and Cosmetics (Second Amendment) Rules, 1977, were making arrangements with institutions approved by the licensing authority for such tests to be carried out on their behalf, may continue such arrangements up to the 31st July, 1977:

3. Ins. by No. F.1-22/59-D, dt. 9-4-1960.
4. Amended by S.O. 2139 dt. 12-8-1972.

Provided further that for tests requiring sophisticated instrumentation techniques or biological or microbiological methods the licensing authority may permit such test to be conducted by institutions approved by it under Part XV(A) of these Rules for this purpose.]

Explanation.−A person who satisfies the following minimum qualifications shall be deemed to be a ―competent person‖ for the purposes of rule 71A or 74A of these rules, namely: − (a) a person who holds the Diploma in Pharmacy approved by the Pharmacy Council of India under the Pharmacy Act, 1948 (VIII of 1948) or a person who is registered under the said Act, or

(b) a person who has passed the Intermediate examination with Chemistry as one of the principal subjects or an examination equivalent to it or an examination recognized by the Licensing Authority as equivalent to it; or

(c) a person who has passed the Matriculation examination or an examination recognized by the Licensing Authority as equivalent to it and has had not less than four years‘ practical experience in the manufacture, dispensing or repacking of drugs.]

1[71B. Conditions for the grant of renewal of a licence in Form 25A.− Before a licence in Form 25A is granted or renewed, the applicant shall, while applying for a licence to manufacture patent or proprietary medicines, furnish to the Licensing Authority evidence and data justifying that the patent or proprietary medicines:- (i) contain the constituent ingredients in therapeutic/prophylactic quantities as determined in relation to the claims or conditions for which the medicines are recommended for use or claimed to be useful;

(ii) are safe for use in the context of the vehicles, recipients, additives and pharmaceutical aids used in the formulations and under conditions in which the formulations for administration and use are recommended;

(iii) are stable under the conditions of storage recommended; and

(iv) contain such ingredients and in such quantities for which there is therapeutic justification.
2[Provided that the application for grant of a licence for a drug formulation containing single active ingredient shall be made only in proper name.]

1[72. Duration of licence.–An original licence or a renewed licence in Form 25, 2[Form 25B or Form 25F] unless sooner suspended or cancelled shall be 3[valid for a period of five years on and from the date on which] it is granted or renewed:

4[Provided that if the application for the renewal of a licence is made before its expiry, or if the application is made within six months of its expiry, after payment of additional fee, the licence shall continue to be in force until orders are passed on the application and the licence shall be deemed to have expired if the application for its renewal is not made within six months of its expiry.]

2[73. Certificate of renewal.– The certificate of renewal of a licence in Form 25 or Form 25F shall be issued in Form 26 or Form 26E respectively].

5[73A. A certificate of renewal of loan licence.- The certificate of renewal of a loan licence in Form 25A shall be issued in Form 26A.]

5[73AA. Duration of loan licence.– An original loan licence in Form 25A or a renewed loan licence in Form 26A, unless sooner suspended or cancelled, shall be 3[valid for a period of five years on and from the date on which] it is granted or renewed:]

6[Provided that if the application for the renewal of a licence is made before its expiry, or if the application is made within six months of its expiry, after payment of additional fee, the licence shall continue to be in force until orders are passed on the application and the licence shall be deemed to have expired if the application for its renewal is not made within six months of its expiry.]

7[73B. Certificate of renewal of licence in Form 25B.–The certificate of renewal of a licence in Form 25B shall be issued in Form 26B.]

1. Subs. by Notfn. No. F.1-10/62-D, dt. 10-4-1964.
4. Amended by S.O. 2139 dt. 12-8-1972.
5. Amended by Notfn. No. F.1-10/62-D, dt. 10-4-1964.
6. Amended by S.O. 2139 dt. 12-8-1972.

1[74. Conditions of licence in Form 25.−A licence in 2[Form 25 and Form 25F] shall be subject to the conditions stated therein and to the following further conditions, namely :

(a) the licensee shall provide and maintain staff, premises and the equipment as specified in rule 71;

(b) the licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Act and of these rules and with such further requirements, if any, as may be specified in any rules subsequently made under Chapter IV of the Act; provided that where such further requirements are specified in the Rules, these would come into force, four months after publication in the Official Gazette;

(c) the licensee shall either in his own laboratory or in any other laboratory approved by the Licensing Authority 4[under Part XV (A) of these rules] test each batch or lot of the raw material used by him for the manufacture of his products and also each batch of the final product and shall maintain records or registers showing the particulars in respect of such tests as specified in Schedule U. The records or registers shall be retained for a period of 5 years from the date of manufacture;

(d) the licensee shall keep records of the details of manufacture as per particulars given in Schedule U of each batch of the drugs manufactured by him and such records shall be retained for a period of five years;

(e) the licensee shall allow an 3[Inspector appointed under the Act], to enter, with or without prior notice, any premises and to inspect the plant and the process of manufacture and the means employed in standardizing and testing the drugs;

(f) the licensee shall allow an 3[Inspector appointed under the Act] to inspect all registers and records maintained under these rules and to take samples of the manufactured drugs and shall supply to such Inspector such information as he may require for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of the Act and the rules thereunder have been observed;

(g) the licensee shall, from time to time, report to the Licensing Authority any changes in the expert staff responsible for the manufacture or testing of the drugs and any material alterations in the premises or plant used for the purpose which have been made since the date of the last inspection made on behalf of the licensing authority;

1. Subs. by Notfn. No. F. 1-20/64-D (S.O. 3868), dt. 26-10-1968.

1[(h) the licensee shall, on request, furnish to the Licensing Authority, the Controlling Authority or to such authorities as the Licensing Authority or the Controlling Authority may direct from every batch, or batches of drugs as the Licensing Authority or the Controlling Authority may from time to time specify, a sample of such quantity as may be considered adequate by such authority for any examination and, if so required, also furnish full protocols of tests which have been applied;]

(i) if the Licensing Authority 2[or the Controlling Authority] so directs and if requested by the licensee who had also furnished prima facie reasons for such directions, the licensee shall not sell or offer for sale any batch in respect of which a sample is or protocols are furnished under clause (h) until a certificate authorizing the sale of the batch has been issued to him by or on behalf of the Licensing Authority 2[or the Controlling Authority;

(j) the licensee shall on being informed by the Licensing Authority 2[or the Controlling Authority] that any part of any batch of the drug has been found by the Licensing Authority 2[or the Controlling Authority]not to conform with the standards of strength, quality or purity specified in these rules and on being directed so to do, withdraw the remainder of the batch from sale, and, so far as may in the particular circumstances of the case be practicable, recall all issues already made from that batch;

(k) the licensee shall maintain an Inspection Book in Form 35 to enable an Inspector to record his impressions and the defects noticed;

1[(l) the licensee shall maintain reference samples from each batch of the drugs manufactured by him in a quantity which is at least twice the quantity of the drug required to conduct all the tests performed on the batch. In case of drugs bearing an expiry date on the label, the reference samples shall be maintained for a period of three months beyond the date of expiry or potency.
In case of drugs where no date of expiry of potency is specified on the label, the reference samples shall be maintained for a period of three years from the date of manufacture;]

2[(m) the licensee, who has been granted a licence in Form 25F, shall-

(i) forward to the licensing authority of the concerned States of manufacture and supply of the drug a statement of the sales effected to manufacturers, wholesalers, retailers, hospitals, dispensaries and nursing homes and Registered Medical Practitioners every three months;

(ii) maintain accounts of all transactions giving details as indicated below in a register bound and serially page numbered and such records shall be retained for a period of five years or one year after the expiry of potency, whichever is later:-

1. Subs. by G.S.R. No. 444 dt. 31-3-1973.
2. Ins. by G.S.R. No. 444 dt. 31-3-1973.

A. Accounts of the drugs specified in Schedule X used for the manufacture:

1. Date of issue.

2. Name of the drug.

3. Opening balance of stock on the production day.

4. Quantity received, if any, and source from where received.

5. Quantity used in manufacture.

6. Balance quantity on hand at the end of the production day.

7. Signature of the person in charge.
B. Accounts of production:
1. Date of manufacture.

2. Name of the drug.

3. Batch Number.

4. Quantity of raw material used in manufacture.

5. Anticipated yield.

6. Actual yield,

7 Wastage,

8. Quantity of the manufactured goods transferred.

C. Accounts of the manufactured drugs:

1. Date of manufacture.

2. Name of the drug.

3. Batch Number.

4. Opening Balance.

5. Quantity manufactured.

6. Quantity sold.

7. Name of the purchaser and his address.

8. Balance quantity at the end of the day.

9. Signature of the person in charge.

(n) the licensee shall store drugs specified in Schedule X in bulk form and when any of such drug is required for manufacture in a place other than its place of storage it shall be kept in a separate place under the direct custody of a responsible person;]

1[(o) the licensee shall comply with the requirements of 2[Good Laboratory Practices as laid down in Schedule L-I and] ̳Good Manufacturing Practices‘ as laid down in Schedule M.]

3[(p) No advertisement of the drugs specified in Schedule H, Schedule H1 and Schedule X shall be made except with the previous sanction of the Central Government.]

2. Ins by G.S.R. 780 (E), dt. 10-11-2008.
3. Ins by G.S.R. 289 (E), dt. 15-04-2015.

74A. Conditions for licence in Form 25B._ A licence in Form 25B shall be subject to the conditions stated therein and to the following conditions:_

(a) the repacking of drugs shall at all times be conducted under the personal supervision of at least one person who is approved as a competent person by the Licensing Authority;

(b) the licensee shall either provide and maintain adequate arrangements in his own premises for carrying out tests of the strength, quality and purity of the drugs repacked or make arrangements with some institution approved by the Licensing Authority 3[under Part XV (A) of these rules] for such tests to be regularly carried out on his behalf by the institution;

(c) the licensee shall make adequate arrangements for the storage of drugs;

2[(d) the licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Act and of these rules and with such further requirements, if any, as may be specified in any rules subsequently made under Chapter IV of the Act:

Provided that where such further requirements are specified in the Rules, these would come into force four months after publication in the Official Gazette.]

(e) the licensee shall allow any 4[Inspector appointed under the Act] to enter with or without notice, any premises where the packing of drugs in respect of which the licence is issued is carried on, to inspect the premises and to take samples of repacked drugs;

2[(f) the licensee shall, either in his own laboratory or, in any other laboratory approved by the Licensing Authority, test each batch or lot of raw material used by him for repacking and also each batch of the product thus repacked and shall maintain records or registers showing the particulars in respect of such tests as specified in Schedule U. The records or registers shall be retained for a period of five years from the date of repacking. The licensee shall allow the Inspector to inspect all registers and records maintained under these rules and shall supply to the Inspector such information as he may require for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of the Act and these rules have been observed;]

2. Subs. by Notfn. No. F.1-20/64-D, dt. 26-10-1968.

1[(g) the licensee shall maintain an Inspection Book, in Form 35, to enable an Inspector to record his impressions and the defects noticed;]

2[(h) the licensee shall maintain reference samples from each batch of the drugs manufactured by him in a quantity which is at least twice the quantity of the drug required to conduct all the tests performed on the batch. In case of drugs bearing an expiry date on the label, the reference sample shall be maintained for a period of three months beyond the date of expiry of potency.
In case of drugs where no date of expiry of potency is specified on the label, the reference samples shall be maintained for a period of three years from the date of manufacture.

4[(i) No advertisement of the drugs specified in Schedule H, Schedule H1 or Schedule X shall be made except with the previous sanction of the Central Government.]

3[74B.Conditions of licence in Form 25A.
(1) The licence in Form 25A

shall be deemed to be cancelled or suspended, if the licence owned by the licensee in Form 25, whose manufacturing facilities have been availed of by the licensee, is cancelled or suspended, as the case may be, under these rules.

(2) The licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Act and of these rules and with such further requirements if any, as may be specified in any rules subsequently made under Chapter IV of the Act; provided that where such further requirements are specified in the rules, these would come into force four months after publication in the Official Gazette.

(3) The licensee shall test each batch or lot of the raw material used by him for the manufacture of his products and also each batch of the final product and shall maintain records or registers showing the particulars in respect of such tests as specified in Schedule U. The records or registers shall be retained for a period of five years from the date of manufacture. The licensee shall allow an Inspector to inspect all registers and records maintained under these rules and shall supply to the Inspector such information as he may require for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of the Act and these rules have been observed.

2. Ins. by G.S.R. 444 (E) dt. 31-3-1973 .
3. Subs. by Notfn. No. F. 1-14/68-D, dt. the 26-10-1968.
4. Ins. by G.S.R. 289 (E) dt. 15-4-2015.

(4) The licensee shall either-

(i) provide and maintain to the satisfaction of the Licensing Authority adequate staff and adequate laboratory facilities for carrying out test of the strength, quality and purity of the substances manufactured by him, or

(ii) make arrangements with some institution approved by the Licensing Authority 7[under Part XV (A) of these rules] for such tests to be regularly carried out on his behalf by the institution.

1[(5) The licensee shall maintain reference samples from each batch of the drugs manufactured by him in a quantity which is at least twice the quantity of the drug required to conduct all the tests performed on the batch. In case of drugs bearing an expiry date on the label the reference samples shall be maintained for a period of three months beyond the date of expiry of potency. In case of drugs where no date of expiry of potency is specified on the label, the reference samples shall be maintained for a period of three years from the date of manufacture.]

2[(6) The licensee shall maintain an Inspection Book in Form 35 to enable an Inspector to record his impressions and the defects noticed.]

8[(7) No advertisement of the drugs specified in Schedule H, Schedule H1 or Schedule X shall be made except with the previous sanction of the Central Government.]

3[75. Form of application for licence to manufacture for sale or distribution of drugs specified in Schedules C and C(1) and X 4[excluding those specified in Part XB and Schedule X]._(1) Applications for the grant or renewal of licence to manufacture for sale or distribution of drugs specified in Schedules C and C(1) 4[excluding those specified in Part X-B and Schedule X], shall be made to the Licensing Authority in Form 27 and 5[shall be made up to ten items for each category of drugs 6[referred to in Schedule M relating to pharmaceuticals products and Schedule M-III relating to medical devices and in-vitro diagnostics] and shall be accompanied by a licence fee of rupees six thousand and an inspection fee of rupees one thousand and five hundred for every inspection or for the purpose of renewal of licences:]

Provided that if the applicant applies for renewal of licence after its expiry but within six months of such expiry, the fee payable for renewal of the licence shall be 5[a licence fee of rupees six thousand plus an additional fee of rupees one thousand per month or a part thereof in addition to an inspection fee of rupees one thousand and five hundred.]

(2) Application for grant or renewal of licence to manufacture for sale or distribution of drugs specified in Schedules C, C(1) and X shall be made to the licensing authority in Form 27-B, and 5[shall be made up to ten items for each category of drugs 6[referred to in Schedule M relating to pharmaceuticals products and Schedule M-III relating to medical devices and in-vitro diagnostics] and shall be accompanied by a licence fee of rupees six thousand and an inspection fee of rupees one thousand five hundred for every inspection or for the purpose of renewal of licences]:

1. Ins. by G.S.R.. No. 444, dt. 28-4-1973. 7. Subs. by G.S.R. 1172(E), dt. 23-8-1977.
2. Ins. by G.S.R. 331 (E), dt. 8-5-1984. 8. Ins. by G.S.R. 289(E), dt. 15-4-2015.

Provided that the applicant shall possess a licence in Form 28 to manufacture such drugs:

Provided further that if the application for renewal of a licence is made after its expiry but within six months of such expiry, the fee payable for renewal of the licence shall be 1[rupees six thousand plus an additional fee of rupees one thousand per month or part thereof in addition to an inspection fee of rupees one thousand five hundred.]

2[(3) The application for grant or renewal of licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution of drugs in 4[Large Volume Parenterals, Sera and Vaccine and Recombinant DNA (r-DNA) derived drugs] shall be made to the licensing authority appointed under this Part in Form 27D and 1[shall be made up to ten items for each category of drugs categorized in Schedule M and shall be accompanied by a licence fee of rupees six thousand and an inspection fee of rupees one thousand five hundred for every inspection or for the purposes of renewal of licences:]

Provided that if the application for renewal of a licence is made after its expiry but within six months of such expiry, the fee payable for renewal of the licence 1[shall be rupees six thousand plus an additional fee of rupees one thousand per month or a part thereof in addition to the inspection fee of rupees one thousand and five hundred.]

1[(4) A fee of rupees one thousand shall be paid for duplicate copy of the licence issued under sub-rule (1), sub-rule (2) or sub-rule (3), as the case may be, if the original licence is defaced, damaged or lost.

(5) If the licensee applies for manufacture of more than ten items of each category of drugs, the application shall be accompanied by an additional fee at the rate of rupees three hundred for each additional item of drugs 5[referred to in Schedule M relating to pharmaceuticals products and Schedule M-III relating to medical devices and in-vitro diagnostics].]

3[(6) Where an application under this Rule is for the manufacture of drug formulations falling under the purview of new drugs as defined in Rule 122-E, such application shall also be accompanied with approval, in writing, in favour of the applicant, from the licensing authority as defined in clause (b) of Rule 21.]]

1[75A. Loan licences.−(1) Applications for the grant or renewal of loan 2[licences for the manufacture for sale or for distribution] of drugs specified in Schedules C and C(1) 3[excluding those specified in Part X-B and Schedule X] shall be made in Form 27-A to the licensing authority and 4[shall be made upto ten items for each category of drugs 14[referred to in Schedule M relating to pharmaceuticals products and Schedule M-III relating to medical devices and in-vitro diagnostics] and shall be accompanied by a fee of rupees six thousand and an inspection fee of rupees one thousand and five hundred for every inspection or for the purpose of renewal of licences:]

5[Provided that if the applicant applies for the renewal of a licence after its expiry but within six months of such expiry the fee payable for renewal of the licence shall be 4[rupees six thousand and an inspection of fee of rupees one thousand five hundred plus an additional fee at the rate of rupees one thousand] per month or a part thereof.]

11[Explanation. − For the purpose of this rule a loan licence means a licence which a licensing authority may issue to an applicant who intends to avail the manufacturing facilities owned by a licensee in Form 28.] 12[(1A) The application for grant or renewal of loan license to manufacture for sale or distribution of drugs in ̳Large Volume Parenterals‘, ̳Sera and Vaccine‘ and ̳Recombinant DNA (r-DNA) derived drugs‘ shall be made to the licensing authority appointed under this Part, in Form 27DA and be made upto ten items for each category of drugs categorized in Schedule M and accompanied by a license fee of six thousand rupees and an inspection fee of one thousand five hundred rupees for every inspection or for the purpose of renewal of licenses:
Provided that if the application for renewal of a license is made after its expiry but within six months of such expiry, the fee payable for renewal of the license shall be six thousand rupees plus an additional fee of one thousand rupees per month or a part thereof in addition to the inspection fee of one thousand and five hundred rupees;]

(2) The licensing authority, shall, before the grant of a loan licence, satisfy himself that the manufacturing unit has adequate equipment, staff, capacity for manufacture and facilities for testing to undertake the manufacture on behalf of the applicant for a loan licence.
13[***] 4[(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2), the application for manufacture of more than ten items of each category of drugs on a loan license, shall be accompanied by an additional fee at the rate of rupees three hundred for each additional item of drugs.
(4) If the licensing authority is satisfied that a loan licence is defaced, damaged or lost, he may, on payment of a fee of rupees one thousand, issue a duplicate copy of loan licence.]

6[* * * * *] 7[76. 8[Forms of licence to manufacture drugs specified in Schedules C and C(1), 9[excluding those specified in Part XB and Schedule X], or drugs specified in Schedules C, C(1) and X and the conditions for the grant or renewal of such licences.- 10[A licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution of drugs specified in

1. Ins. by F.1-16/57-D, dt. 15-6-1957.
5. Amended by S.O.2139 dt. 13-8-1972.
6. Rule 75B omitted by G.S.R. 944 (E), dt. 21-9-1988.
7. Amended by F- 1- /57-D, dt. 15-6-1969.
9. Subs. by G.S.R. 28 (E) , dt. 22.1.1993.
12. Ins. by G.S.R. 574 (E) , dt. 17.7.2012.
13. Proviso omitted by G.S.R. 574 (E) , dt. 17.7.2012.

Schedules C and C(1) other than 4[Large Volume Parenterals, Sera and Vaccine and Recombinant DNA (r-DNA) derived drugs] specified in Part X B and Schedule X shall be issued in Form 28 and a licence to manufacture for sale or distribution of drugs specified under Schedules C and C(1) (other than 4[Large Volume Parenterals, Sera and Vaccine and Recombinant DNA (r-DNA) derived drugs] specified in Part X-B) and Schedule X shall be issued in Form 28B. A licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution of 4[Large Volume Parenterals, Sera and Vaccine and Recombinant DNA (r-DNA) derived drugs] shall be issued in Form 28-D. Before a licence in Form 28 or Form 28B or Form 28D is granted or renewed, the following conditions shall be complied with by the applicant:-

(1) The manufacture will be conducted under the active direction and personal supervision of competent technical staff consisting at least of one person who is a whole time employee and who is

(a) a graduate in Pharmacy or Pharmaceutical Chemistry of 1[a University established in India by law or has an equivalent qualification recognized and notified by the Central Government for such purpose] and has had at least eighteen months‘ practical experience after the graduation in the manufacture of drugs to which this licence applies; this period of experience may however be reduced by six months if the person has undergone training in manufacture of drugs to which the licence applies for a period of six months during his University course; or

(b) a graduate in Science of 1[a University established in India by law or has an equivalent qualification recognized and notified by the Central Government for such purpose] who for the purpose of his degree has studied Chemistry 3[or Microbiology] as a principal subject and has had at least three years‘ practical experience in the manufacture of drugs to which this licence applies after his graduation; or

(c) a graduate in Medicine of 1[a University established in India by law or has an equivalent qualification recognized and notified by the Central Government for such purpose] with at least three years‘ experience in the manufacture and pharmacological testing of biological products after his graduation; or

2[(d) a graduate in Chemical Engineering of a University recognised by the Central Government with at least three years‘ practical experience in the manufacture of drugs to which this licence applies after his graduation; or

(e) holding any foreign qualification the quality and content of training of which are comparable with those prescribed in clause (a), clause (b), clause (c) or clause (d) and is permitted to work as competent technical staff under this Rule by the Central Government.]

2. Ins. by F.1-19/59-D, dt. 13-6-1967.

Provided that any person who was approved by the licensing authority as an expert responsible for the manufacture of drugs for the purpose of rule 76 read with Rule 78 as these Rules were in force immediately before the 29th June, 1957, shall be deemed to be qualified for the purposes of this rule:
1[Provided that for the drugs specified in Schedules C and C(1) meant for veterinary use, the whole time employee under whose supervision the manufacture is conducted may be a graduate in Veterinary Science or general science or medicine or pharmacy of a University, recognized by the Central Government and who has had at least three years‘ experience in the manufacture of biological products:
5[Provided also that for medical devices, the whole time employee under whose supervision the manufacture or testing is conducted shall be— (i) a graduate in Pharmacy or Engineering (in appropriate branch) from a University recognised by the Central Government for such purposes and has had at least eighteen months practical experience in the manufacturing or testing of devices to which this licence applies after his graduation; or (ii) a graduate in science, from a University recognised by the Central Government for such purposes, with Physics or Chemistry or Microbiology as one of the subject and has had at least three years practical experience in the manufacturing or testing of devices to which this licence applies after his graduation; or (iii) a diploma in Pharmacy or Engineering (in appropriate branch) from a Board or Institute recognised by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, for such purposes and has had at least four years practical experience in the manufacturing or testing of devices to which this licence applies after his diploma; or (iv) having a foreign qualification, the quality and content of training of which are comparable with those specified in clause (i), clause (ii) and clause (iii) and is permitted to work as competent technical staff under this rule by the Central Government.] 6[(2) The applicant proposing to manufacture pharmaceutical products shall comply with the provisions referred to in Schedule M.

(2A) The applicant proposing to manufacture medical devices and in-vitro diagnostics shall comply with the quality management system as referred to in Schedule M-III.

(3) The applicant shall provide adequate space, plant and equipment for pharmaceutical products as referred to in Schedule M and for Medical devices and invitro diagnostics as referred to in Schedule M-III.] 3[(4) The applicant shall provide and maintain adequate staff, premises and laboratory equipment for carrying out such tests of the strength, quality and purity of the substances as may be required to be carried out by him under the provisions of Part X of these rules including proper housing for animals used for the purposes of such tests, the testing unit being separate from the manufacturing unit and the head of the testing unit being independent of the head of the manufacturing unit:
Provided that the manufacturing units which before the commencement of the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Rules, 19774, were making arrangements with institutions approved by the Licensing Authority for such tests to be carried out on their behalf may continue such arrangements upto the 30th June, 1977 :
Provided further that for tests requiring sophisticated instrumentation techniques or biological or microbiological methods other than sterility the Licensing Authority may permit such tests to be conducted by institutions approved by it 2[under Part XV (A) of these rules] for this purpose.
1. Ins. by F.1-6/62-D (SO 2889), dt. 2-7-1969.
3. Sub. by G.S.R 926 (E), dt. 24-6-1977.
4. These rules came in to force on 28th May, 1977 vide G.S.R 665 (E), dt. 6-5-1977.
5. Sub. by G.S.R 690 (E), dt. 25-9-2014. Earlier Ins. by G.S.R 109 (E), dt. 22-2-1994.
6. Sub. by G.S.R 640 (E), dt. 29-6-2016.

1[(4A) The head of the testing unit referred to in condition (4) shall possess a degree in Medicine or Science or Pharmacy or Pharmaceutical Chemistry of a University recognized for this purpose and shall have experience in the testing of drugs, which in the opinion of the Licensing authority is considered adequate.]

(5) The applicant shall make adequate arrangements for the storage of drugs manufactured by him.

2[(6) The applicant shall furnish to the Licensing Authority, if required to do so, data on the stability of drugs which are likely to deteriorate for fixing the date of expiry which shall be printed on the labels of such drugs on the basis of the data so furnished.]

3[(7) The applicant shall, while applying for licence to manufacture patent or proprietary medicines, furnish to the Licensing Authority evidence and data justifying that the patent or proprietary medicines− (i) contain the constituent ingredients in therapeutic/prophylactic quantities as determined in relation to the claims or conditions for which the medicines are recommended for use or claimed to be useful;

(ii) are safe for use in the context of the vehicles, excipients, additives and pharmaceutical aids used in the formulations and under the conditions in which the formulations for administration and use are recommended;

(iii) are stable under the conditions of storage recommended;

(iv) contain such ingredients and in such quantities for which there is therapeutic justification.;] and

4[(v) have the approval, in writing, in favour of the applicant to manufacture drug formulations falling under the purview of new drug as defined in Rule 122E, from the licensing authority as defined in clause (b) of rule 21.]

5[(8) The licensee of pharmaceutical products shall comply with the requirements of ̳Good Manufacturing Practices‘ as laid down in Schedule M and the licensee of Medical Devices and in-vitro diagnostics shall comply with the requirements of ―Quality Management System‖ as laid down in Schedule M-III..]

2. Ins. by G.S.R 444 dt. 31-3-1973.
3. Ins. by G.S.R 515 dt. 24-3-1976.
5. Subs. by G.S.R 640 (E), dt. 29-06-2016. Previously Ins. by G.S.R 735 (E), dt. 24-6-1988.

1[Explanation:- For the purpose of this rule, 6[―Large Volume Parenterals‖ sera and vaccines and recombinant DNA (r-DNA) derived drugs,] shall mean the sterile solutions intended for parenteral administration with a volume of 100 ml. or more (and shall include anti-coagulant solutions) in one container of the finished dosage form intended for single use.] 7[(9) The applicant shall make application for grant of licence for a drug formulation containing single active ingredient only in proper name.]

2[76A. Forms of loan licenses to manufacture for sale or for distribution drugs specified in Schedule C and C(1) excluding drugs specified in Schedule X or of Large Volume Parenterals, Sera and Vaccine and recombinant DNA (r-DNA) derived drugs, and conditions for the grant or renewal of such license.— A loan license to manufacture for sale or for distribution of drugs specified in Schedules C and C(1), excluding drugs specified in Schedule X, and Large Volume Parenterals, Sera and Vaccine and Recombinant DNA(rDNA) derived drugs specified in Part XB shall be issued in Form 28A and a loan license to manufacture for sale or for distribution of Large Volume Parenterals, Sera and Vaccine and Recombinant DNA (r-DNA) derived drugs shall be issued in Form 28DA, and the applicant shall, while applying for a licence to manufacture patent or proprietary medicines, furnish to the Licensing Authority evidence and data justifying that the patent or proprietary medicines-

(i) contain the constituent ingredients in therapeutic/prophylactic quantities as determined in relation to the claims or conditions for which the medicines are recommended for use or claimed to be useful;

(ii) are safe for use in the context of the vehicles, excipients, additives and pharmaceutical aids used in the formulations, and under the conditions in which the formulations for administration and use are recommended;

(iii) are stable under the conditions of storage recommended; and

(iv) contain such ingredients and in such quantities for which there is therapeutic justification.] 7[Provided that the application for grant of a licence for a drug formulation containing single active ingredient shall be made only in proper name.]

3[77. Duration of licence.
An original licence in 4[Form 28, Form 28B and Form 28D or renewed licence in Forms 26, 26F, and Form 26H], unless sooner suspended or cancelled shall be 5[valid for a period of five years on and from the date on which] it is granted or renewed:

2. Subs. by G.S.R. 574 (E), dt. 17-7-2012.Earlier Subs. by G.S.R. 788 (E), dt. 10-10-1985 and Subs. by G.S.R.
462 (E), dt. 22-6-1982.
3. Amended by No. G.1-10/62-D, dt. 10-4-1964.
7. Ins. by G.S.R. 570 (E) dt. 7-8-2014.

1[Provided that if the application for the renewal of a licence is made before its expiry, or if the application is made within six months of its expiry after payment of additional fee, the licence shall continue to be in force until orders are passed on the application and the licence shall be deemed to have expired if the application for its renewal is not made within six months of its expiry.]]

2[78. Conditions of licence.−A licence in 3[Form 28, Form 28B or Form 28D] shall be subject to the special conditions, if any, set out in Schedule F or ScheduleF(1), as the case may be, which relate to the substance in respect of which the licence

is granted and to the following general conditions:−

(a) (i) The licensee shall provide and maintain an adequate staff and adequate premises and plant for the proper manufacture and storage of the substances in respect of which the licence is issued;

(ii) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing requirement, every holder of a licence who for any purpose engaged in the culture or manipulation of pathogenic spore-bearing micro-organisms shall provide to the satisfaction of the Licensing Authority separate laboratories and utensils and apparatus required for the culture or manipulation of such micro-organisms, the laboratories, utensils and apparatus so provided not being used for the manufacture of any other substance;

4[(b) The licensee shall provide and maintain staff, premises and equipment as specified in Rule 76;]

5[(c)(i) The licensee shall maintain records of manufacture as per particulars given in Schedule U;

(ii) The licensee shall either in his own laboratory or in any laboratory approved by the Licensing Authority 6[under Part XV (A) of these rules] test each batch or lot of the raw material used by him for the manufacture of his product and also each batch of the final product and shall maintain records or registers showing the particulars in respect of such tests as specified in Schedule U. The records or registers shall be retained in the case of a substance for which a potency date is fixed for a period of two years from the expiry of such date, and in the case of other substances for a period of five years from the date of manufacture;]

(d) The licensee shall allow an 7[Inspector appointed under the Act] to enter, with or without prior notice, any premises where the manufacture is carried on and to inspect the premises, and in the case of substances specified in Schedules C and C(1), to inspect the plant and the process of manufacture and the means employed for standardizing and testing the substance;]

1. Amended by S.O. 2139 dt. 12-8-1972.
2. Amended by F.1-6/62-B, dt. 2-6-1969.

(e) The licensee shall allow an 1[Inspector appointed under the Act] to inspect all registers and records maintained under these Rules and to take samples of the manufactured product and shall supply to such Inspector such information as he may require for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of the Act and Rules thereunder have been observed;]

(f) The licensee shall from time to time report to the Licensing Authority any changes in the expert staff responsible for the manufacture or testing of the substance and any material alterations in the premises or plant used for that purpose which have been made since the date of the last inspection made on behalf of the Licensing Authority before the issue of the licence;

1[(g) The licensee shall on request furnish to the Licensing Authority, Controlling Authority or to such authorities as the Licensing Authority or the Controlling Authority may direct, from every batch of drug as the Licensing Authority or the Controlling Authority may from time to time specify, a sample of such quantity as may be considered adequate by such Authority for any examination and, if so required, also furnish, full protocols of the tests which have been applied;]

2[(h) If the Licensing Authority or the Controlling Authority so directs, the licensee shall not sell or offer for sale any batch in respect of which a sample is, or protocols are furnished under the last preceding sub-paragraph until a certificate authorising the sale of the batch has been issued to him by or on behalf of the Licensing Authority or the Controlling Authority;]

1[(i) The licensee shall on being informed by the Licensing Authority or the Controlling Authority that any part of any batch of the substance has been found by the Licensing Authority or the Controlling Authority not to conform with the standards of strength, quality or purity specified in these rules and on being directed so to do, withdraw the remainder of that batch from sale and so far as may in the particular circumstances of the case be practicable recall all issues already made from that batch;]

(j) No drug manufactured under the licence shall be sold unless the precautions necessary for preserving its properties have been observed throughout the period after manufacture;

3[(k) The licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Act and of these rules and with such further requirements, if any, as may be specified in any rules subsequently made under Chapter IV of the Act, provided that where such further requirements are specified in the rules, these would come into force four months after publication in the Official Gazette;]

1. Subs. by G.S.R 444, dt. 28-4-1973.
2. Amended by F.1-16/57-D, dt. 15-6-1957.
3. Amended by F.1-14/68-B (SO 3868), dt. 26-10-1968.

1[(l) The licensee shall maintain an Inspection Book in Form 35 to enable an Inspector to record his impression and defects noticed.]

2[(m) The licensee shall maintain reference samples from each batch of the drugs manufactured by him in a quantity which is at least twice the quantity of the drug required to conduct all the tests performed on the batch. In case of drugs bearing an expiry date on the label, the reference samples shall be maintained for a period of three months beyond the date of expiry of potency. In case of drugs where no date of expiry is specified on the label the reference samples shall be maintained for a period of three years from the date of manufacture.]

3[(n) The licensee, who has been granted a license in Form 28B shall−

(i) forward to the licensing authority of the concerned States of manufacture and supply of the drug a statement of the sales effected to manufacturers, wholesalers, retailers, hospitals, dispensaries and Nursing Homes and Registered Medical Practitioners every three months;

(ii) maintain accounts of all transactions giving details as indicated below in a register bound and serially page numbered and such records shall be retained for a period of five years or one year after the expiry of potency, whichever is later.

A. Accounts of the drugs specified in Schedule X used for the manufacture:-

1. Date of issue.

2. Name of the drug.

3. Opening balance of stock on the production day.

4. Quantity received, if any, and source from where received.

5. Quantity used in manufacture.

6. Balance quantity on hand at the end of the production day.

7. Signature of the person in charge.

1. Subs. by F.1-14/68-B (SO3868), dt. 26-10-1968.

B. Accounts of Production:

1. Date of manufacture.

2. Name of the drug.

3. Batch Number.

4. Quantity of raw material used in manufacture.

5. Anticipated yield.

6. Actual yield.

7 Wastage.

8. Quantity of the manufactured goods transferred.

C. Accounts of the manufactured drugs:
1. Date of manufacture.

2. Name of the drug.

3. Batch Number.

4. Opening Balance.

5. Quantity manufactured.

6. Quantity sold.

7. Name of the purchaser and his address.

8. Balance quantity at the end of the day.

(o) The licensee shall store drugs specified in Schedule X in bulk form and when any of such drug is required for manufacture in a place other than its place of storage it shall be kept in a separate place under the direct custody of a responsible person.]

1[(p) The licensee shall comply with the requirements of 3[ ̳Good Manufacturing Practices‘ as laid down in Schedule L-1 and Good Manufacturing Practices‘ as laid down in Schedule M.]

4[(q) No advertisement of the drugs specified in Schedule H, Schedule H1 or Schedule X shall be made except with the previous sanction of the Central Government.]

2[78A. Conditions of license in 5[Form 28A or Form 28DA]- (1) The license in 5[Form 28A of Form 28DA] shall be deemed to be cancelled or suspended, if the licence owned by the licensee in 6[5[Form 28 or Form 28D] whose manufacturing facilities have been availed of by the licensee is cancelled or suspended, as the case may be, under these rules.

2. Amended by F.1-14/68-D (S.O. 3868), dt. 26-10-1968.

(2) The licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Act, and of these rules and with such further requirements if any, as may be specified in any rules subsequently made under Chapter IV of the Act, provided that where such further requirements are specified in the rules, those would come into force four months after publication in the Official Gazette.

(3) The licensee shall test each batch or lot of the raw material used by him for the manufacture of his products and also each batch of the final product and shall maintain records or registers showing the particulars in respect of such tests as specified in Schedule U. Records or registers shall be retained, in the case of a substance for which a potency date is fixed, for a period of two years from the expiry of such date and in the case of other substances, for a period of five years from the date of manufacture. The licensee shall allow an Inspector to inspect all registers and records maintained under these rules and shall supply to the Inspector such information as he may require for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of the Act and these rules have been observed.

(4) The licensee shall either (i) provide and maintain to the satisfaction of the Licensing Authority adequate staff and adequate laboratory facilities for carrying out tests of the strength, quality and purity of the substances manufactured by him, or (ii) make arrangements with some institution approved by the Licensing Authority for such tests to be regularly carried out on his behalf by the institution.]

1[(5) The licensee shall furnish to the Licensing Authority, if required to do so, data on the stability of drugs which are likely to deteriorate for fixing the date of expiry which would be printed on the labels of such drugs on the basis of the data so furnished.]

2[(6) The licensee shall maintain reference samples from each batch of the drug manufactured by him in a quantity which is at least twice the quantity of the drug required to conduct all the tests performed on the batch. In case of drugs bearing an expiry date on the labels, the reference samples shall be maintained for a period of three months beyond the date of expiry of potency. In case of drugs where no date of expiry of potency is specified on the label, the reference samples shall be maintained for a period of three years from the date of manufacture.]

3[(7) The licensee shall maintain an Inspection Book in Form 35 to enable an Inspector to record his impressions and the defects noticed.]

4[(8) No advertisement of the drugs specified in Schedule H, Schedule H1 or Schedule X shall be made except with the previous sanction of the Central Government.
5[79. Inspection before grant or renewal of licence.−Before a licence under

Ins. by G.S.R. 444, dt. 28-4-1973.
Subs. by G.S.R. 574 (E), dt. 17-7-2012.
Ins. by G.S.R. 331 (E), dt. 8-5-1984.
Ins. by G.S.R. 289 (E), dt. 15-4-2015.

this Part is granted or renewed the Licensing Authority or Central Licence Approving Authority, as the case may be, shall cause the establishment in which the manufacture is proposed to be conducted or being conducted to be inspected by one or more Inspectors appointed under this Act with or without an expert in the concerned field. The Inspector or Inspectors shall examine all portions of the premises, plant and appliances and also inspect the process of manufacture intended to be employed or being employed along with the means to be employed or being employed for standardizing and testing the drugs to be manufactured or being manufactured and enquire into the professional qualifications of the technical staff to be employed. He shall also examine and verify the statements made in the application in regard to their correctness, and the capability of the applicant to comply with the requirements of competent technical staff, manufacturing plants, testing equipments and the ̳Requirements of Good Manufacturing Practices‘ and the ̳Requirements of Plant and Equipment‘ as laid down in Schedule M read with the Requirements of Maintenance of Records as laid down in Schedule U.]

1[80. Report by Inspector.−The Inspector shall forward a detailed descriptive report giving his findings on each aspect of inspection along with his recommendations after completion of his inspection in accordance with the provisions of Rule 79, to the Licensing Authority or Central Licence Approving Authority, as the case may be.]

81. Procedure of Licensing Authority.−(1) If the Licensing Authority 5[or Central Licence Approving Authority, as the case may be,] after such further enquiry, if any, as he may consider necessary, is satisfied that the requirements of the Rules under the Act have been complied with and that the conditions of the licence and the Rules under the Act will be observed, he 2[shall issue a licence under this Part].

(2) If the Licensing Authority 5[or Central Licence Approving Authority, as the case may be,] is not so satisfied, he shall reject the application and shall inform the applicant of the reasons for such rejection and of the conditions which must be satisfied before a licence can be granted and shall supply the applicant with a copy of the inspection report.

3[82. Further application after rejection. −If within a period of six months from the rejection of an application for a licence the applicant informs the Licensing Authority 5[or Central Licence Approving Authority, as the case may be,] that the conditions laid down have been satisfied and deposits an inspection 4[fee of rupees two hundred and fifty] the Licensing Authority 5[or Central Licence Approving Authority, as the case may be,] may, if after causing a further inspection to be made, he is satisfied that the conditions for the grant of a licence have been complied with, 5[in respect of drugs notified under Rule 68-A] issue a licence in Form 28 2[or Form 28-B].

3. Ins. by F.1-16/57-D, dt. 15-6-1957.

83. Renewal.−On application being made for renewal, the licensing authority may cause an inspection to be made and, if satisfied that the condition of the licence and the Rules under the Act are, and will continue to be observed, 1[he shall prepare a report to that effect in respect of those drugs which have been notified by the Central Government under Rule 68-A and forward it along with the application to the Central Licence Approving Authority], and shall issue a certificate of renewal 3[under this Part].

3[83-A. Certificate of renewal of a loan licence.−The certificate of renewal of a loan licence in 8[Form 28A or Form 28DA] shall be issued in Form 26A or Form 26J respectively.]

4[83-AA. Duration of loan licence.−An original loan licence in 8[Form 28A or Form 28DA] or a renewed loan licence in 8[Form 26A or Form J], unless sooner suspended or cancelled, shall be 5[valid for a period of five years on and from the date on which] it is granted or renewed:

6[Provided that if the application for the renewal of a licence is made before its expiry, or if the application is made within six months of its expiry, after payment of the additional fee, the licence shall continue to be in force until orders are passed on the application and the licence shall be deemed to have expired if the application for its renewal is not made within six months of its expiry].]

84. The provisions of this Part shall apply to the manufacture of drugs for sale notwithstanding that such drugs are manufactured for sale outside India.

7[6[84-A. Provision for appeal to the State Government or Central Government by party whose licence has not been granted or renewed.− Any person who is aggrieved by the order passed by the Licensing Authority or the Central Licence Approving Authority, as the case may be, refusing to 2[grant or renew a licence under this Part], may within thirty days from the date of receipt of such order, appeal to the State Government or Central Government, as the case may be, and the State Government or the Central Government may, after such enquiry into the matter,] as is considered necessary and after giving the said person an opportunity for representing his views, may pass such order in relation thereto as it thinks fit.]

2. Subs. by G.S.R. 119 (E), dt. 11-3-1996..
3. Ins. by F1-16/57-B, dt. 15-6-1957.
4. Ins. by Notfn. No. F. 1-10/62-D, dt. 10-4-1964.
6. Subs. by S.O. 2139, dt. 12-8-1972.
7. Subs. by G.S.R. 923 (E), dt. 14-12-1992 as corrected by G.S.R. 373 (E), dt. 13-4-1993.

6[84AA. Additional information to be furnished by an applicant for licence or a licensee to the licensing authority. The applicant for the grant of a licence or any person granted a licence under this Part shall, on demand, furnish to the Licensing Authority, before the grant of the licence or during the period the licence is in force, as the case may be, documentary evidence in respect of the ownership or occupation on rental or other basis of the premises, specified in the application for licence or in the licence granted, constitution of the firm or any other relevant matter which may be required for the purpose of verifying the correctness of the statements made by the applicant or the licensee, while applying for or after obtaining the licence, as the case may be.]

1[84B. Prohibition for the manufacture for sale of cyclamates and preparations containing cyclamates. No person shall manufacture for sale cyclamates and preparations containing cyclamates.]

2[85. Cancellation and suspension of licences. (1) The Central Licence Approving Authority may, after giving the licensee an opportunity to show cause why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing stating the reasons therefor, cancel a licence issued under this Part, or suspend it for such period as he thinks fit either wholly or in respect of any of the drugs to which it relates 3[or direct the licensee to stop manufacture, sale or distribution of the said drugs and 4[thereupon order the destruction of drugs and] the stock thereof in the presence of an Inspector], if in his opinion, the licensee has failed to comply with any of the conditions of the licencee or with any provisions of the Act or rules made thereunder.

(2) The Licensing Authority may, for such licences granted or renewed by him, after giving the licensee an opportunity to show cause why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing stating the reasons therefor, cancel a licence issued under this Part or suspend it for such period as he thinks fit, either wholly or in respect of some of the substances to which it relates, 3[or direct the licensee to stop manufacture, sale or distribution of the said drugs and 4[thereupon order the destruction of drugs and] the stock thereof in the presence of an Inspector] if, in his opinion, the licensee has failed to comply with any of the conditions of the licence or with any provisions of the Act or rules made thereunder.]

5[(3) A licensee whose licence has been suspended or cancelled by the Central Licence Approving Authority or Licensing Authority under sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2), as the case may be, may within ninety days of the receipt of a copy of the order by him prefer an appeal to the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, and the Central Government or the State Government may after giving the licensee an opportunity of being heard, confirm, reverse or modify such order.]

1. Ins. by S.O.2358, dt. 26-8-1972.
2. Subs. by G.S.R. 923 (E), dt. 14-12-1992 as corrected by G.S.R. 373 (E), dt. 13-4-1993.
4. Ins. by (Corrigenda) G.S.R. 514 (E), dated 5.11.1996.
5. Ins. by 615 (E), dt. 9-8-1994 as corrected by G.S.R. 55 (E), dt. 7-2-1995.

1[PART VIIA 2[MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OR FOR DISTRIBUTION]
OF HOMOEOPATHIC MEDICINES

85A . Manufacture on more than one set of premises. If Homoeopathic

medicines are manufactured in more than one set of premises a separate application shall be made and a separate licence shall be obtained in respect of each such set of premises.

85B. Application for licence to manufacture Homoeopathic medicines. (1)

Application for grant or renewal of 2[licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution] of Homoeopathic medicines shall be made to the Licensing Authority appointed by the State Government for the purpose of this Part (hereinafter in this Part referred to as the Licensing Authority) and shall be made in Form 24-C.

3[(2) The application in Form 24-C shall be accompanied–

(a) by a fee of 4[rupees two hundred] for the manufacture of Homoeopathic mother tinctures and potentised preparations and an inspection fee of 4[rupees one hundred] for the first inspection or 4[rupees fifty] in case of inspection for renewal of licence;

(b) by a fee of 4[rupees two hundred] for the manufacture of Homoeopathic potentised preparations only, and an inspection fee of 4[rupees one hundred] for the first inspection or 4[rupees fifty] in case of inspection for renewal of licence;

(c) by a fee of 4[rupees two hundred] for the manufacture of potentised preparations from back potencies by pharmacies which are already licensed to sell Homoeopathic medicines by retail and an inspection fee of 4[rupees one hundred] for the first inspection or 4[rupees fifty] in case of inspection for renewal of licence.

1. Ins. under G.S.R. 1185 (E), dt. 18-8-1964.
2. Sub. by G.S.R. 788 (E), dt. 10-10-1985.
3. Sub. by G.S.R. 245, dt. 11-2-1976.

1[(3) If a person applies for renewal of a licence after its expiry but within six months of such expiry, the fee payable for the renewal of such a licence shall be_

(a) 2[rupees two hundred] plus an additional fee at the rate of 2[rupees one hundred] per month or part thereof and an inspection fee of 2[rupees fifty] for the manufacture of Homoeopathic mother tinctures and potentised preparations;

4[(b)2[rupees two hundred] plus an additional fee at the rate of 2[rupees one hundred] per month or part thereof and an inspection fee of 2[rupees fifty] for the manufacture of Homoeopathic potentised preparations only;]

(c) 2[rupees two hundred] plus an additional fee at the rate of 2[rupees one hundred] per month or part thereof and an inspection fee of 2[rupees fifty] for the manufacture of Homoeopathic mother tinctures and potentised preparations from back potencies by pharmacies who are already licensed to sell Homoeopathic medicines by retail.]

(4) A fee of 2[rupees fifty] shall be paid for a duplicate copy of the licence for the manufacture of Homoeopathic mother tinctures and potentised preparations issued under sub-rule (1) if the original is defaced, damaged or lost, while the fee to be paid for such a duplicate copy of the licence for the manufacture of Homoeopathic potentised preparations only shall be 2[rupees fifty].

3[(5) Applications by licensee to manufacture additional items of Homoeopathic medicines shall be made to the Licensing Authority and such applications shall be accompanied by a fee of 2[rupees fifty] for each additional item.]

85C. Application to manufacture ̳New Homoeopathic medicines.‘ the other provisions of these Rules Subject to

(1) no ̳New Homoeopathic medicine‘ shall be manufactured unless it is previously approved by the Licensing Authority mentioned in Rule 21;

(2) the manufacturer of ̳New Homoeopathic medicine‘, when applying to the Licensing Authority mentioned in sub-rule (1) shall produce such documentary and other evidence as may be required by the Licensing Authority for assessing the therapeutic efficacy of the medicine including the minimum provings carried out with it.

(3) While applying for a licence to manufacture a ̳New Homoeopathic medicine‘ an applicant shall produce along with his application evidence that the ̳New Homoeopathic medicine‘ for the manufacture of which application is made has already been approved.

Explanation.−The term ̳New Homoeopathic medicine‘ in this rule shall have the same meaning as in rule 30AA.

1[85D. Form of licence to manufacture Homoeopathic medicines.—Licence for manufacture of Homoeopathic medicines is a licence to manufacture potentised preparations from back potencies by Pharmacies who are already licensed to sell Homoeopathic medicines by retail and shall be granted in Form 25C.]

85E. Conditions for the grant or renewal of a licence in Form 25C−Before a licence in Form 25C is granted or renewed the following conditions shall be complied with by the applicant:—

(1) The manufacture of Homoeopathic medicines shall be conducted under the direction and supervision of competent technical staff consisting at least of one person who is a whole time employee 2[and who is—

(a) a graduate in Science with Chemistry as one of the subjects with three years‘ experience in manufacture of Homoeopathic Medicines; or

(b) a graduate in Pharmacy with 18 months of experience in the manufacture of Homoeopathic medicines; or

(c) holds qualification as defined under sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of section 2 of Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973 (59 of 1973) with 18 months of experience in the manufacture of Homoeopathic medicines:

Provided that the persons who are already in employment with five years‘ experience in the manufacture of Homoeopathic medicines and whose name was accordingly entered in any licence granted in Form 25C for manufacture of different classes of Homoeopathic medicines included in them shall be deemed to be qualified for the purpose of this rule.]

3[(2) The factory premises shall comply with the requirements and conditions specified in Schedule M-I:

2. Subs. by G.S.R. 812 (E), dt. 14-11-1994 as corrected by G.S.R. 517 (E), dt. 26-6-1995.

Provided that where the Licensing Authority considers it necessary or expedient so to do, it may having regard to the nature and extent of manufacturing operations, relax or suitably alter the said requirements or conditions in any particular case for reasons to be recorded in writing.]

(3) The applicant for manufacture of Homoeopathic mother tinctures shall either (i) provide and maintain adequate staff, premises and laboratory equipment for identifying the raw materials and for testing the mother tinctures wherever possible, or (ii) make arrangements with some institution approved by the Licensing Authority 2[under Part XV(A) of these rules] for such tests, wherever possible, to be regularly carried out on his behalf by that institution.

(4) The premises where Homoeopathic medicines are manufactured shall be distinct and separate from the premises used for residential purposes.

(5) Homoeopathic medicines shall not be manufactured simultaneously with drugs pertaining to other systems of medicine.

(6) The applicant shall make arrangements for proper storage of Homoeopathic medicines manufactured by him:

1[Provided that in case potentised preparations are made in a Pharmacy holding licence in Form 20-C, the conditions (2) and (3) shall not apply. The licensee shall ensure to the satisfaction of the Licensing Authority that the products manufactured by it, conform to the claims made on the label.]

3[85-EA. Inspection before grant or renewal of licence.-- Before a licence under this Part is granted or renewed in Form 25C or Form 26C, the Licensing Authority shall cause the establishment, in which the manufacture is proposed, to be conducted or being conducted, to be inspected by one or more Inspectors shall examine all portions of the premises, plant and appliances and also inspect the process of manufacture intended to be employed or being employed along with the means to be employed or being employed for standardizing and testing the substances to be manufactured and inquire into the professional qualifications of the technical staff to be employed. He shall also examine and verify the statements made in the application in regard to their correctness, and the capability of the applicant to comply with the requirements of competent technical staff, manufacturing plants, testing equipments and the requirements of plant and equipment as laid down in Part I of Schedule M read with the requirements of maintenance of records as laid down in Schedule U.

85EB. Report by Inspector.–The Inspector or Inspectors shall forward a detailed descriptive report giving his or their findings on each aspect of inspection along with his or their recommendations after completion of his or their inspection to the Licensing Authority.

85EC. Grant or refusal of licence.– (1) If the Licensing Authority after such further enquiry, if any, as he may consider necessary is satisfied that the requirements of the rules under the Act have been complied with and that conditions of the licence and the rules under the Act shall be observed, he shall grant or renew a licence in Form 25C or Form 26C.

(2) If the Licensing Authority is not so satisfied, he shall reject the application and shall inform the applicant of the reasons for such rejection and of the conditions which must be satisfied before a licence can be granted or renewed and shall supply the applicant with a copy of inspection report.]

85ED. Further application after rejection. .–If within a period of six months from the rejection of an application for a licence, the applicant informs the Licensing Authority that the conditions laid down have been fulfilled and deposits an inspection fee of 1[rupees two hundred and fifty], the Licensing Authority may, if, after causing further inspection to be made, he is satisfied that the conditions for the grant of licence have been complied with, issue a licence in Form 25C or Form 26C.

85EE. Appeal to the State Government.–Any person who is aggrieved by the order passed by the Licensing Authority refusing to grant or renew a licence under this Part may within ninety days from the date of receipt of such order, appeal to the State Government and the State Government may, after such enquiry into the matter as is considered necessary and after giving the said person an opportunity for representing the case, pass such order as it thinks fit.]

85F. Duration of licence.–An original licence or a renewed licence unless it is sooner suspended or cancelled shall be 1[valid for a period of five years on and from the date on which] it is granted or renewed:

2[Provided that if the application for renewal of a licence in force is made before its expiry or if the application is made within six months of its expiry, after payment of additional fee, the licence shall continue to be in force until orders are passed on the application and the licence shall be deemed to have expired if application for its renewal is not made within six months of its expiry.]

85G. Certificate of renewal.–The certificate of renewal of a licence in Form 25-C shall be issued in Form 26-C.

2. Subs. by S.O. 2139, dt. 12-8-1972.

85H. Conditions of licence.–A licence in Form 25-C shall be subject to the conditions stated therein and to the following further conditions, namely :

(a) the licensee shall provide and maintain staff and premises as specified in Rule 85-E;

(b) the licensee shall allow an 1[Inspector appointed under the Act] to enter, with or without prior notice, any premises where the manufacture of a Homoeopathic medicine in respect of which the licence is issued is carried on, to inspect the premises and to take samples of the manufactured Homoeopathic medicines;

(c) the licensee shall allow an Inspector to inspect all registers and records maintained under these rules and shall supply to the Inspector such information as he may require for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder have been observed;

2[(d) the licensee shall maintain an Inspection Book in Form 35 to enable an Inspector to record his impressions and defects noticed;]

(e) the licensee shall comply with the following conditions in respect of mother tinctures manufactured by him_

(i) the crude drug used in the manufacture of the mother tincture shall be identified and records of such identification shall be kept 3[for a period of five years];

(ii) the total solids in the mother tincture shall be determined and records of such tests shall be kept 3[for a period of five years];

(iii) the alcohol content in the mother tincture shall be determined and records of the same shall be maintained 3[for a period of five years];

(iv) the containers of mother tinctures shall preferably be of glass and shall be clean and free from any sort of impurities or adhering matter. The glass shall be neutral as far as possible;

(v) in the process of manufacture of mother tinctures hygienic conditions shall be scrupulously observed by the licensee. Storage and handling conditions shall also be properly observed by the licensee according to Homoeopathic principles;

1. Amended by G. S. R. 444, dt. 28-4-1973.
2. Amended by F-1-14/ 68-D, dt. 26-10-1968.

1[(ea) no colour shall be added to any Homoeopathic medicines :

Provided that caramel may be added to combination of Homoeopathic preparations with syrup base;]

(f) records shall be maintained of Homoeopathic medicines containing alcohol and the quantities sold together with names and addresses of parties to whom sold.2 [Such records shall be maintained for a period of five years.]

3[85HH. Additional information to be furnished by an applicant for the licence or a licensee to the Licensing Authority.–The applicant for the grant of licence or any other person granted a licence under this Part shall, on demand, furnish to the Licensing Authority, before the grant of the licence or during the period the licence is in force, as the case may be, documentary evidence in respect of the ownership or occupation in rental or other basis of the premises, specified in the application for licence or in the licence granted, constitution of the firm or any other relevant matters which may be required for the purpose of verifying the correctness of the statements made by the applicant or the licensee, while applying for or after obtaining the licence, as the case may be.]

85-I. Cancellation and suspension of licences.– (1) The Licensing Autority may, after giving the licensee an opportunity to show cause why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing stating the reasons therefor, cancel a licence issued under this Part or suspend it for such period as he thinks fit, either wholly or in respect of some of the substances to which it relates if, in his opinion, the licensee has failed to comply with any of the conditions of the licence or with any provisions of the Act or Rules made thereunder.

4[(2) A licensee whose licence has been suspended or cancelled may, within three months of the date of the order under sub-rule (1), prefer an appeal against that order to the State Government, which shall decide the same.]

PART VIII

MANUFACTURE FOR EXAMINATION, TEST OR ANALYSIS

86. Conditions relating to manufacture for examination, test or analysis.–The provisions of Section 18 of the Act shall not apply to the manufacture of any drug in small quantities for the purpose of examination, test or analysis if the conditions prescribed in this Part are fulfilled.

87. Labelling.–Any drug manufactured for the purpose of examination, test or analysis shall be kept in containers bearing labels indicating the purpose for which it has been manufactured.

88. Labelling of drugs supplied to other persons.–If any drug manufactured for the purpose of examination, test or analysis is supplied by the manufacturer to any other person, the container shall bear a label on which shall be stated the name and address of the manufacturer, the accepted scientific name of the substance if known, or if not known a reference which will enable the substance to be identified and the purpose for which it has been manufactured.

3. Ins. by S. O. 2139, dt. 12-8-1972.
4. Subs. G.S.R. 926, dt. 16-7-1977.

89. Licence.–If the person proposing to manufacture a drug for the purpose of examination, test or analysis does not hold a licence in Form 25 or Form 28 in respect of such drugs he shall, before commencing such manufacture, obtain a licence in Form 29:
1[Provided that in the case of a drug the composition of which is such that the drug is not generally recognized among experts qualified by scientific training and experience to evaluate the safety of drugs as safe for use, no licence in Form 29 shall be granted unless the applicant produces a certificate from the ―Licensing Authority‖ mentioned in Rule 21, to the effect that there would be no objection to such licence being granted.

90. Form of application.– 2[(1)] An application for a licence in Form 29 shall be made to the Licensing Authority appointed by the State Government for the purpose of this Part (hereafter in this Part referred to as the Licensing Authority) in Form 30 and shall be made by or countersigned by the head of the institution in which, or a director of the firm or company by which, the substance will be manufactured.
4[(2) Every application in Form 29 shall be accompanied by a fee of 3[rupees two hundred fifty].
91. Duration of licence.–A licence in Form 29 shall, unless sooner cancelled, be in force for a period of one year from the date of issue, and may thereafter be renewed for periods of one year at a time.

92. Conditions of licence. −A licence in Form 29 shall be subject to the following conditions (a) the licensee shall use the drugs manufactured under the licence exclusively for purpose of examination, test or analysis, and shall carry on the manufacture and examination, test or analysis at the place specified in the licence;
(b) the licensee shall allow any 3[inspector appointed under the Act] to enter, with or without notice, the premises where the drugs are manufactured and to satisfy himself that only examination, test or analysis work is being conducted;
(c) the licensee shall keep a record of the quantity of drugs manufactured for examination, test or analysis and of any person or persons to whom the drugs have been supplied;

(d) the licensee shall comply with such further requirements, if any, applicable to the holders of licences in Form 29 as may be specified in any rules subsequently made under the Act and of which the Licensing Authority has given him not less than one month‘s notice;
(e) the licensee shall maintain an Inspection Book to enable an Inspector to record his impressions and defects noticed.
93. Cancellation of licences.- (1) The Licensing Authority may after giving the licensee an opportunity to show cause why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing stating the reasons therefor, cancel a licence issued under this Part, either wholly or in respect of some of the substances to which it relates, if, in his opinion, the licensee has failed to comply with any of the conditions of the licence or with any provision of the Act or Rules thereunder

1. Ins. under F. 1-19/59-D (SO 1449), dt. 13-6-1961.
2. Re-numbered by S.O. 903, dt. 28-2-1976.
3. Subs. by G.S.R. by 444, dt. 31.3.1973.
4. Ins. by S.O 903, dt. 28-2-1976.

1[(2) A licensee whose licence has been suspended or cancelled may appeal to the State Government within three months of the date of the order.]

PART IX
LABELLING AND PACKING OF DRUGS OTHER THAN
HOMOEOPATHIC MEDICINES
94. Exemption of certain drugs from certain provisions of this Part.— (1) Labels on packages or containers of drugs for export shall be adapted to meet the specific requirements of the law of the country to which the drug is to be exported but the following particulars shall appear in a conspicuous position on the innermost container in which the drug is packed and every other covering in which that container is packed:
(a) name of the drug;
(b) the name, address of the manufacturer and the number of the licence under which the drug has been manufactured;
(c) batch or lot number;
(d) date of expiry, if any:
2[Provided that where a drug, not classified under Schedule F, Schedule F(1) and Schedule X, 5[or blood products defined under rule 122EA] is required by the consignee to be not labelled with the name and address of the manufacturer, the labels on packages or containers shall bear a code number as approved by the Licensing Authority mentioned in Rule 21.] 4[Provided further that where a drug classified as Narcotic Drug or Psychotropic Substance is to be exported under a code number, the same may be permitted by the said licensing authority on the following conditions, namely:- (i) Each consignment of export shall be accompanied with requisite import license from the importing country;
(ii) The applicant shall obtain a no objection certificate from the Drugs Controller, India for manufacture of such formulations to be exported with code number against each export order along with certificate from the regulatory authority of the importing country controlling Narotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances that they do not have any objection for the import of the drug with code number;
(iii) The State Licensing Authority shall issue the manufacturing license for these formulations on each export order on the basis of a No Objection Certificate from Drugs Controller, India;
(iv) A no objection certificate shall be obtained from the drugs Controller, India for export of each consignment; and (v) A no objection certificate shall be obtained from the Narcotic Commissioner of India, Gwalior for export of each consignment of the drug.] 3[(2) The provisions of Rules 96 to 101 inclusive, shall not apply to a medicine made up ready for treatment, whether after or without dilution, which is supplied on the prescription of a registered practitioner provided that:
(i) the medicine is labelled with the following particulars : –

(a) the name and address of the supplier;

(b) the name of the patient and the quantity of the medicine;

(c) the number representing serial number of the entry in the prescription register;
1. Subs. by F.1-10/68-D (S.O 2482), dt. 17-6-1969.
3. Subs. by F.1-19/59-D, dt. 13-6-1961.
5. Subs. by 592 (E), dt. 13-8-2008.

(d) the dose, if the medicine is for internal use;

1[(e) the words ―FOR EXTERNEL USE ONLY‖ shall be printed on the label if the medicine is for external application].

(ii) Condition (3) of the conditions in Rule 65 is satisfied.]

95. Prohibition of sale or distribution unless labelled.—Subject to the other provisions of these Rules, no person shall sell or distribute any drug (including a patent or proprietary medicine) unless it is labelled in accordance with these Rules.

2[96. Manner of Labelling .— (1) Subject to the other provisions of these Rules, the following particulars shall be either printed or written in indelible ink and shall appear in a conspicuous manner on the label of the innermost container of any drug and on every other covering in which the container is packed, namely :—

(i) the name of the drug−

3[(A) for this purpose, the proper name of the drug shall be printed or written in a more conspicuous manner than the trade name, if any, which shall be shown immediately after or under the proper name and shall be]—

(a) for drugs included in the Schedule F or Schedule F (1), the name given therein;

(b) for drugs included in the Indian Pharmacopoeia or the official pharmacopoeias and official compendia of drug standards prescribed in Rule 124, the name or synonym specified in the respective official pharmacopoeias and official compendia of drug standards followed by the letters ̳I.P., or, as the case may be, by the recognized abbreviations of the respective official pharmacopoeias and official compendia of drug standards;

(c) for drugs included in the National Formulary of India, the name or synonym specified therein followed by the letters ̳N.F.I.‘;

(d) for other drugs, the international non-proprietary name, if any, published by the World Health Organisation or where an international non-proprietary name is not published, the name descriptive of the true nature or origin of the substance;

4[* * * * *]

(ii) A correct statement of the net content in terms of weight, measure, volume, number of units of contents, number of units of activity, as the case may be, and the weight, measure and volume shall be expressed in Metric system.

2 Amended under G.S.R.19, dt. 15-12-1977.
4. Sub-clause (B) omitted by G.S.R. 94 (E), dt. 8-2-2000. Earlier ins. by G.S.R. 27 (F), dt.-1-1981.

(iii) The content of active ingredients− This shall be expressed− (a) for oral liquid preparations in terms of the content per single dose, being indicated in 5 millilitres 1[** *]:
Provided that where the dose is below 5 millilitres the contents of active ingredients may be expressed in terms of 1 millilitre; 2[or fraction thereof:] 3[Provided further that where the single dose is more than 5 millilitres, the content of active ingredients shall be expressed in terms of minimum single dose as approved by the licensing authority;] (b) for liquid parenteral preparations ready for administration in terms of 1 millilitre or percentage by volume or per dose in the case of single dose container :
Provided that if the preparation is contained in an ampoule it will be enough if the composition is shown on the label or wrapper affixed to any package in which such ampoule is issued for sale;

(c) for drugs in solid form intended for parenteral administration, in terms of units or weight per milligram or gram;

(d) for tablets, capsules, pills and the like, in terms of the content in each tablet, capsule, pill or other unit, as the case may be;

(e) for other preparations, in terms of percentage by weight or volume or in terms of unitage per gram or millilitre, as the case may be:

Provided that clause (iii) shall not apply to the pharmacopoeial preparations where the composition of such preparation is specified in the respective pharmacopoeia and to a preparation included in the National Formulary of India.
(iv) 4[The name of the manufacturer and the address of the premises of the manufacturer where the drug has been manufactured:]

Provided that if the drug is contained in an ampoule or a similar small container, it shall be enough if only the name of the manufacturer and his principal place of 5[manufacture] is shown.

(v) A distinctive batch number, that is to say, the number by reference to which details of manufacture of the particular batch from which the substance in the container is taken are recorded and are available for inspection, the figure representing the batch number being preceded by the words ̳Batch No.‘ or ̳B. No.‘ or ̳Batch‘ or ̳Lot No.‘ or ̳Lot‘.

NOTES

(1) In the case of drugs manufactured by a continuous process, like manufacture of magnesium sulphate, pharmaceutical chemicals etc., the production resulting in one homogenous mix of the finished products shall be considered as one ―Batch‖.

1. Omitted by G.S.R. 285 (E), dt. 16-7-1996.

(2) In the case of powders, liquid orals, ointments etc., one ―Batch Number‖ shall be assigned to all the containers filled from one homogenous bulk.

(3) In the case of tablets, capsules, lozenges, troches, etc., one ―Batch Number‖ shall be assigned to the products manufactured from one homogenous mix ready for compression or filling.

(4) In the case of parenteral preparations sterilized by steam under pressure, one ―Batch Number‖ shall be assigned to all containers filled from one homogenous bulk solution and sterilized in one sterilizer load.

(5) In the case of containers of parenteral preparations filled from one homogenous bulk solution and sterilized in more than one sterilizer load, the ―Batch Number‖ assigned to the containers in the different sterilizer loads shall be the same ―Batch Number‖ as is assigned to the homogenous bulk solution, provided the samples taken from all the sterilizer loads pass the sterility test, and are kept separate from one another until the report of the sterility test is available.

Explanation.— For the purpose of chemical and other tests, representative samples from all containers filled from the homogenous bulk solution should be taken.

(6) In the case of parenteral and other sterile products filled aseptically, a ―Batch Number‖ shall be assigned to all containers filled from one homogenous mix during one filling operation, the filling operation being completed in a period of not more than a day and during which no schedule change in the filling assembly is made.

When containers are filled from one homogenous mix, in a number of filling operations, the ―Batch Number‖ assigned to the containers filled in individual filling operations shall be the same ―Batch Number‖ as is assigned to the homogenous mix, provided the samples taken from all the different filling operations pass the sterility tests, and are kept separate from one another until the report of the sterility test is available.

Explanation.-For the purpose of chemical and other tests, representative samples from all containers filled from the homogenous mix should be taken.

(7) In the case of medicinal gases produced by a continuous process of operation a week‘s production from one tank load shall be considered as a Batch.

(vi) Every drug manufactured in India shall bear on its label the number of the licence under which the drug is manufactured, the figure representing the manufacturing licence number being preceded by the words ―Manufcaturing Licence Number‖ or ―Mfg. Lic. No.‖ or ―M.L.‖.

(vii) Drugs specified in Schedule P and their preparations including combinations with other drugs shall bear on their labels the date of manufacture, and the date of expiry of potency, and the period between the date of manufacture

and the date of expiry shall not exceed that laid down in the said Schedule 1[under the conditions of storage specified therein.
2[Drugs and their preparations not included in Schedule P], shall bear on their labels the date of their manufacture and also the date of their expiry which shall not exceed sixty months from the date of manufacture:]

Provided that this period may be extended by the Licensing Authority specified in clause (b) of Rule 21 in respect of any specified drug if satisfactory evidence is produced by the manufacturer to justify such an extension.

7[(viii) Drugs specified in Schedule C(I) and their preparations including combinations in other drugs shall bear on their labels (a) the date of manufacture, and (b) date of expiry of potency fixed by the manufacturer:

3[4[Provided that drugs in bulk form included in Schedule C(I) which are not ready for use and not included in Schedule P need not bear on the label the date of expiry of potency:]

Provided further that no reference shall be made to any other licence number granted by any authority outside India on any label or container or in any covering in which the container is packed or in any other matter or advertisement enclosed therewith].

(ix) Every drug intended for distribution to the medical profession as a free sample shall, while complying with the labelling provisions under clauses (i) to (viii), further bear on the label of the container the words ̳Physician‘s Sample—Not to be sold‘ which shall be overprinted.

5[(x) If any preparation contains not less than 3 per cent by volume of alcohol the quantity of alcohol shall be stated in terms of the average percentage by volume of absolute alcohol in the finished products.]

6[(xi) In addition to the other particulars which are required to be printed or written under these Rules, the label of innermost container of the following categories of drugs and every other covering in which the container is packed shall bear a conspicuous red vertical line on the left side running throughout the body of the label which should not be less than 1mm in width and without disturbing the other conditions printed on the label under these rules, namely: —

Narcotic analgestics, hypnotics, sedatives, tranquillisers, corticosteroids, hormones, hypoglycemics, antimicrobials, antiepileptics, antidepressants, anticoagulants, anti-cancer drugs and all other drugs falling under Schedules ̳G‘, ̳H‘, and ̳X‘ whether covered or not in the above list:

Provided that the provisions of this clause shall not apply to: − (a) preparations intended for animal treatment;

(b) preparations intended for external use;

(c) ophthalmic preparations and ear drops; and

(d) sterile preparations such as sutures, surgical dressings and preparations intended for parenteral use.]

1[(xii) Drugs and their preparations including combinations with other drugs imported into the country shall also bear on the label, the license number under which the drug is imported, preceded by the words ―Import License‖ and the name and address of the importer.]

(2)(i) The particulars to be printed or written on the label of a mechanical contraceptive shall be as specified in Schedule R.

(ii) The following particulars, in addition to those specified under sub-rule (1) shall be either printed or written in indelible ink and shall appear in a conspicuous manner on the label of the innermost container and on every other covering in which the container of a contraceptive, other than a mechanical contraceptive, is packed, namely : − (a) the date of manufacture;

(b) the date upto which the contraceptive is expected to retain its properties;

(c) the storage conditions necessary for preserving the properties of the contraceptive upto the date indicated in sub-clause (b) :

Provided that for oral contraceptives it shall be sufficient to display on the label of the container the date of manufacture only.
(3)(i) The particulars prescribed in sub-rule (1) shall be printed or written in indelible ink either on the label borne by a container of vaccine lymph or on a label or wrapper affixed to any package in which the container is issued for sale. The said particulars shall be indelibly marked on the sealed container of surgical ligature or suture or printed or written in indelible ink on a label enclosed therein.
(ii) Nothing in these rules shall be deemed to require the labelling of any transparent cover or of any wrapper, case or other covering used solely for the purpose of packing, transport or delivery.
(4) Where by any provision of these rules any particulars are required to be displayed on a label on the container, such particulars may, instead of being displayed on a label, be etched, painted or otherwise indelibly marked on the container:

Provided that, except where otherwise provided in these rules, the name of the drug or any distinctive letters intended to refer to the drug shall not be etched, painted or otherwise indelibly marked on any glass container other than ampoules.

Explanation.— For the purpose of this rule, the date of expiry shall be in terms of month and year and it shall mean that the drug is recommended till the last day of the month. The date of expiry shall be preceded by the words ̳Expiry date‘.]

97. Labelling of medicines.— 1[(1) The container of a medicine for internal use shall— (a) if it contains a substance specified in Schedule G, be labelled with the words ―Caution: it is dangerous to take this preparation except under medical supervision‖ – conspicuously printed and surrounded by a line within which there shall be no other words;

(b) if it contains a substance specified in Schedule H, be labelled with the symbol Rx and conspicuously displayed on the left top corner of the label and be also labelled with the following words:

̳Schedule H drug- Warning: To be sold by retail on the prescription of a Registered Medical Practitioner only‘,

(c) if it contains a substance specified in Schedule H, and comes within the purview of the 2[Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985)] be labelled with the symbol NRx which shall be in red and conspicuously displayed on the left top corner of the label, and be also labelled with the following words:

̳Schedule H drug -Warning: To be sold by retail on the prescription of a Registered Medical Practitioner only‘;

(d) If it contains a substance specified in Schedule X, be labelled with the symbol XRx which shall be in red conspicuously displayed on the left top corner of the label and be also labelled with the following words : - ̳Schedule X drug -Warning: To be sold by retail on the prescription of a Registered Medical Practitioner only‘.

4[(e) if it contains a drug substance specified in Schedule H1, the drug formulation shall be labeled with the symbol Rx which shall be in red conspicuously displsyed on the left top corner of the label, and shall also be labelled with the following words in a box with a red border:
“SCHEDULE H1 DRUG – WARNING.
- It is dangerous to take this preparation except in accordance with the medical advice.
- Not to be sold by retail without the prescription of a Registered Medical Practitioner.]

(2) The container of an embrocation, liniment, lotion, 3[ointment, antiseptic cream,] liquid antiseptic or other liquid medicine for external application shall be labelled with the words:

―FOR EXTERNAL USE ONLY‖.

2. Subs. By G.S.R. 282(E), dt. 16.7.1996. As corrected by G.S.R. 241(E), dt. 15.4.1998.

1[(3) The container of a medicine made up ready only for treatment of an animal shall be labelled conspicuously with the words ̳Not for human use; for animal treatment only‘ and shall bear a symbol depicting the head of a domestic animal.] 2[* * * * *] 10[(3A) The container of a medicine for treatment of food producing animals shall be labeled with the withdrawal period of the drug for the species on which it is intended to be used:

Provided that if the specific withdrawal period has not been validated, the withdrawal period shall not be less than seven days for eggs or milk, twenty eight days for meat from poultry and mammals including fat and offal, five hundred degree days for fish meat.
Explanation:- For the purpose of this Rule, the withdrawal period is the period of interval between the last administration of a veterinary medicine to animals under the normal conditions of use and the production of food stuff from such animals to ensure that food stuffs do not contain residues in quantities in excess of the maximum residue limits laid down.] 3[(4)] The container of a medicine prepared for treatment of human ailments shall if the medicine contains industrial methylated spirit, indicate this fact on the label and be labelled with the words :
―For External Use only‖.
4[(5) Substances specified in Schedule X in bulk form shall bear a label wherein the symbol as specified in sub-Rule (1) shall be given conspicuously in red letters.] 5[* * * * *] 6[102. Non-Sterile Surgical Ligature and Suture.- Every container of, and wrapper enclosing surgical ligature or suture other than a ligature or suture offered or intended to be offered for sale as sterile, shall bear a label on which are printed or written in a conspicuous manner in indelible red ink the words ―Non-sterile surgical ligature (suture) – not to be used for operations upon the human body unless efficiently sterilized‖.]

103. 7[* * * * *]

(2) The name and address of the manufacturer shall be printed on the label of the container of a patent or proprietary medicine.
8[(3) The true formula or list of the ingredients shall be printed or written in indelible ink on the outer label of every package containing patent or proprietary medicine.]

9[104 Use of letter I.P. etc.--The letters ̳I.P‘. and recognized abbreviations of pharmacopoeias and official compendia of drug standards prescribed under these Rules shall be entered on the label of the drug only for the purpose of indicating that the drug is in accordance with standards set out in the Indian Pharmacopoeia or in any such pharmacopoeia or official compendium of drug standards recognized under the Rules.]
1. Subs. by notification No. F.1-6/62-D(S.O.2889),, dt. 2.7.1969.
2. Subs. (4) omitted by G.S.R. 462 (E), dt. 22-1-1982.
3. Sub-rule (5) re-numbered as sub-Rule (4), by G.S.R. 462 (E), dt. 22-6-1982.
5. Rules 98, 99,100 and 101 omitted, by G.S.R. 462 (E), dt. 22-6-1982.
6. Sub. by F. No. F1-3/51-DS, dt. 15.10.1954.
7. Sub-rule (1) omitted by S.O. 2136, dt. 15.6.1957.
8. Sub. by S.O. 2136, dt. 15.6.1957.
9. Sub. by G.S.R. 19, dt. 15.12.1977.

1[104A. Prohibition against altering inscriptions on containers, labels or wrappers of drug. –No person shall alter, obliterate or deface any inscription or mark made or recorded by the manufacturer on the container, label or wrapper of any drug:

Provided that nothing in this rule shall apply to any alteration, any inscription or mark made on the container, label or wrapper of any drug at the instance or direction or with the permission of the Licensing Authority.]

2[105. Packing of drugs.–(1) The pack sizes of drugs meant for retail sale shall be as prescribed in Schedule P1 to these rules.

(2) The pack sizes of drugs not covered by Schedule P-1 shall be as given below: –

Unless specified otherwise in Schedule P-1,

(i) The pack sizes for Tablets/Capsules shall be–

Where the number of Tablets (coated or uncoated)/Capsules (hard or soft gelatin) is less than 10, such packing shall be made by the integral number. For numbers above 10, the pack size of Tablets/Capsules shall contain multiples of 5.

(ii) The pack sizes for liquid Oral preparations shall be 30 ml (paediatric only)/60 ml/100 ml/200 ml/450 ml.
(iii) The pack sizes for Paediatric Oral Drops shall be 5 ml/10 ml/15 ml.
(iv) The pack sizes for Eye/Ear/Nasal drops shall be 3 ml/5 ml/10 ml.
(v) The pack size for Eye Ointment shall be 3 gm/5 gm/ 10 gm:

Provided that the provisions of the pack sizes covered under this rule shall not apply to: –
1. Pack sizes or dosage forms not covered by the foregoing provisions of this rule.
2. The imported formulations in finished form.
3. Preparations intended for Veterinary use.
4 Preparations intended for Export.
5. Vitamins/Tonics/Cough Preparations/Antacids/Laxatives in Liquid Oral forms, Unit dose (including applicaps).
6. Pack sizes of dosage forms meant for retail sale to Hospitals, Registered Medical Practitioners, Nursing Homes.
7. Physician‘s Samples.
8. Pack sizes of large volume Intravenous Fluids:

4[Provided further that] pack sizes of any of the new drug as and when approved by the Licensing Authority appointed under Rule 21 and if not covered under this rule, shall be examined for the purpose of approval with specific justification by the said Licensing Authority:
3[4[Provided also that] Oxytocin injection meant for sale shall be in single unit blister pack only:] 5[Provided also that Diclofenac injection for human use shall be in single unit dose pack only.]

3. Sub. by G.S.R. 242 (E), dt. 3-4-2001.
4. Sub. by G.S.R. 558 (E), dt. 17-7-2015.

1[105A. Packings of drugs specified in Schedule X.- The drugs specified in Schedule X shall be marketed in packings not exceeding-

(i) 100 unit doses in the case of tablets/capsules;

(ii) 300 ml in the case of oral liquid preparations; and

(iii) 5 ml in the case of injections:

Provided that nothing in this rule shall apply to packing meant for use of a hospital or a dispensary subject to the conditions that–

(i) such supplies are made by the manufacturers or distributors direct to the hospital/dispensaries; and

(ii) hospital packs shall not be supplied to a retail dealer or to a Registered Medical Practitioner.]

2[106. Diseases which a drug may not purport to prevent or cure.—(1) No drug may purport or claim to prevent or cure or may convey to the intending user thereof any idea that it may prevent or cure one or more of the diseases or ailments specified in Schedule J.

(2) No drug may purport or claim to procure or assist to procure, or may convey to the intending user thereof any idea that it may procure or assist to procure, miscarriage in women.

3[* * * *]

4[PART IXA

LABELLING AND PACKINGOF HOMOEOPATHIC MEDICINES

106-A. Manner of labelling of Homoeopathic medicines.—(A) The following particulars shall be either printed or written in indelible ink and shall appear in a conspicuous manner on the label of the innermost container of any Homoeopathic medicine and on every other covering in which the container is packed—

(i) The words ̳Homoeopathic medicine‘, (ii) The name of the medicine— 5[(a) For drugs specified in the Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeias of India or the United States of America or the United Kingdom, or the German Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia, the name specified in that Pharmacopoeia.]

(b) For other drugs, the name descriptive of the true nature of the drugs.

2. Sub. by notification F. 1-16/52-DC (SO 2122), dt. 22-6-1954.

(iii) The potency of the Homoeopathic medicine—For this purpose the potency shall be expressed either in decimal, centesimal or millisimal systems.

1[(iiiA) In case of Homoeopathic medicine containing two or more ingredients the name of each ingredient together with its potency and proportion expressed in metric system shall be stated on the label.]

2[(iv) Name and address of the manufacturer when sold in original containers of the manufacturer. In case a Homoeopathic medicine is sold in a container other than that of the manufacturer—the name and address of the seller:] 5[Provided that where such medicines are imported, the name and address of the importer shall also be mentioned on the label.]

(v) In case the Homoeopathic medicine contains alcohol, the alcohol content in percentage by volume in terms of ethyl alcohol shall be stated on the label:
3[Provided that in case the total quantity of the pharmacopoeial homoeopathic medicine in the container is 30 millilitres or less, it will not be necessary to state the content of alcohol on the label.]

(B) In addition to the above particulars the label of a Homoeopathic mother tincture shall display the following particulars: −

(i) A distinctive batch number, that is to say, the number by reference to which details of manufacture of the particular batch from which the substance in the container is taken are recorded and are available for inspection, the figures representing the batch number being preceded by the words ―Batch No.‖ or ―Batch‖ or ―Lot Number‖ or ―Lot No.‖ or ―Lot‖ or any distinguishing prefix.

(ii) Manufacturing licence number, the number being preceded by the words

―Manufacturing Licence Number‖ or ―Mfg. Lic. No.‖ or ―M.L.‖.

4[Explanation.−This clause shall not apply to a Homoeopathic mother tincture manufactured outside India.
(C) No Homoeopathic medicine containing a single ingredient shall bear a proprietary name on its label.]

2. Sub. by notification F.1-59/68-D, dt. 19-11-1969.

1[106-B. Prohibition of quantity and percentage.–No Homoeopathic medicine containing more than 12% alcohol v/v (Ethyl alcohol) shall be packed and sold in packing or bottles of more than 30 millilitres, except that it may be sold to hospitals/dispensaries in packings or bottles of not more than 100 millilitres.]

PART X

SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TOBIOLOGICAL
AND OTHER SPECIAL PRODUCTS

2[107. Name of substance.—If any substance specified in Schedule C is advertised or sold as a proprietary medicine or is contained in a medicine so advertised or sold, the proper name of the substance shall appear on the label in the manner prescribed in this Part.

3[Explanation.−For the purpose of this rule the expression ―proper name‖ means the proper name stated in Schedule F or if no such name is stated, the name descriptive of the true nature and origin of the substance:
Provided that in the case of veterinary biological product the expression ―proper name‖ means the proper name stated in Schedule F (1) or if no such name is stated, the name or synonym given in the current edition for the time being of the 4[British Pharmacopoea (Veterinary)] , or, if no such name is stated either in Schedule F (1) or the 4[British Pharmacopoea (Veterinary)], the name descriptive of the true nature and origin of the substance approved by the Licensing Authority.

108. Container.—5[(1) No substance specified in Schedule C shall be sold or offered for sale unless it has been sealed in a previously sterilized container made of glass or any other suitable material approved for the purpose by the Licensing Authority appointed under rule 21, in such manner as may, in the opinion of the Licensing Authority, suffice to preclude the access of bacteria:

Provided that it shall not be necessary to use a previously sterilized container if the filled and sealed container is to be sterilized after the sealing and such sterilizing procedure would render the product sterile. However, the Licensing Authority may, for any special reasons, direct the licensee to pre-sterile such containers.]

(2) When any such substance is issued in liquid form in containers which are sealed in such a manner that portions of the contents can be withdrawn for use on different occasions, the liquid shall contain a sufficient proportion of some antiseptic to prevent the growth of any organism which may be accidentally introduced in the process of removing a portion of the contents of the container:

6[Provided that nothing in this sub-rule shall apply to a penicillin suspension in oil and wax.]

2. Subs. by F. 1-5/47-D (SRO 2889), dt. 25-11-1949.
3. Subs. by F. 1-6/62-D, dt. 2-7-1969.
4. Subs. by G.S.R.647 (E), dt. 28-10-1998.
6. Ins. by SO 115, dt. 04-1-1961.

1[(3) The container shall comply with such further requirements, if any, as are specified in Schedule F or Schedule F (1) as the case may be, in that behalf.

(4) The Licensing Authority may in the case of any particular preparation of any such substance dispense with any of the requirements of this Rule or Schedule F or Schedule F (1) as the case may be, and may make such additional requirements, as having regard to the nature of the preparation, they may deem necessary.]

2[109. Labelling.–(1) The following particulars and such further particulars, if any, as are specified in Schedule F or Schedule F (1), as the case may be, shall be printed or written in indelible ink on the label of every phial, ampoule or other container of a substance specified in Schedule C and on every other covering in which such phial, ampoule or container is packed—

(a) where a drug is imported, the number of licence under which it is imported, preceded by the words ̳Import Licence‘:

Provided that no reference shall be made to any other import licence number granted by any authority outside India on any label or container or in any covering in which the container is packed or in any other matter of advertisement enclosed therein;

(b) where a test for potency in units is required by these rules, a statement of the potency in units defined in terms of relation to the standard preparation specified in Schedule F or F (1), as the case may be :

Provided that this clause shall not apply in the case of vaccine lymph;

(c) where a test for potency or maximum toxicity is required the date upto which the substance if kept under suitable conditions may be expected to retain a potency not less than stated on the label of the container or not to acquire a toxicity greater than that permitted by the test, as the case may be. The date of expiry shall be in terms of month and year and it shall mean that the drug is recommended for use till the last day of the month. The date of expiry shall be preceded by the words ̳Expiry date‘ :

Provided that nothing in these rules shall be deemed to require the labelling of any transparent cover or any wrapper, case or other covering used solely for the purpose of packing, transport or delivery.

(2) The particulars prescribed in clause (a) of the preceding sub-rule shall be printed or written in indelible ink either on the label borne by a container of vaccine lymph or on a label or wrapper affixed to any package in which the container is issued for sale. The said particulars shall be indelibly marked on the sealed container of surgical ligature or suture or printed or written in indelible ink on a label enclosed therein.

1. Subs. by F.1-6/62-D (SO 2889), dt. 2-7-1969.
2. Subs. by G.S.R.19, dt. 15-12-1977.

(3) The following particulars, and such further particulars, if any, as are specified in Schedule F or Schedule F (1), as the case may be, shall be printed or written in indelible ink either on the label borne by the container of any substance specified in Schedule C or on a label or wrapper affixed to any package in which any such container is issued for sale, namely:–

(a) the date on which the manufacture of the particular batch from which the substance in the container is taken was completed as defined in Schedule F or Schedule F(1), or if there is no definition in Schedule F or Schedule F(1) as hereafter defined in this rule and in the case of vaccine prepared from concentrates, the date of completion of the final products and the bottling for issue;

(b) where an antiseptic substance has been added, the nature and the percentage proportion introduced;

(c) the precaution necessary for preserving the properties of the contents up to the date indicated in clause (c) of sub-rule (1).

(4) For the purpose of clause (a) of sub-rule (3), the date on which the manufacture of a batch is completed shall be—

(a) in cases where a test for potency or toxicity is required by these rules or not being so required, is accepted by the Licensing Authority as sufficient for the purpose of fixing the date of completion of manufacture, the date on which the substance was removed from cold storage after having been kept at a temperature not exceeding 5° C continuously for a period not exceeding two years from the time when the last test was completed,

(b) in cases where no such test is required or accepted−

(i) if the substance is a serum obtained from a living animal, the earliest date on which any material contributing to the batch was removed from the animal;

(ii) if the substance was obtained by the growth of organisms or artificial media, the earliest date on which growth was terminated in any of the material contributing to the batch:

Provided that if a batch of the substance (including all material contributing to this batch) has for a period of not more than three years been kept in cold storage at a temperature not exceeding 5°C continuously from the earliest practicable date after that on which growth was terminated in the material as the case may be, the date of removal from cold storage shall be treated as the date on which the manufacture of the batch is completed;

(c) in all other cases, the date on which the substance is filled in the container.

1[109-A. Labelling of Medical Devices.– Subject to the other provisions of these rules, the following particulars shall be printed in indelible ink on the label or sticker on the shelf pack of the medical device or on the outer cover of such medical device and on every outer covering in which the medical device is packed, namely:–– (a) proper name of the medical device;
(b) the details necessary for the user to identify the device and its use;
(c) the name of the manufacturer and address of the manufacturing premises where the device has been manufactured;
(d) the correct statement of the net quantity in terms of weight, measure, volume, number of units, as the case may be, and the number of the devices contained in the package shall be expressed in metric system; and (e) the date of manufacture and date of expiry; alternately the label shall bear the shelf life of the product:

1. Sub. by G.S.R. 690 (E), dt. 25-9-2014. Earlier Ins. by G.S.R. 109 (E), dt. 22-2-1994.

Provided that in the case of sterile devices the date of sterilisation may be given as date of the manufacture of the device:
Provided further that the device is made up of stable materials such as stainless steel or titanium, and supplied non-sterile, date of expiry may not be necessary;
(f) to provide, wherever required, an indication that the device contains medicinal or biological substance;
(g) to provide, a distinctive batch number or lot number preceded by the word ―Lot No.‖ or ―Lot‖ or ―Batch No.‖ or ―B. No.‖;
(h) to indicate, wherever required, any special storage or handling conditions applicable to the device;
(i) to indicate, if the device is supplied as a sterile product, its sterile state and the sterilisation method;
(j) to give, if considered relevant, warnings or precautions for the attention of the user of the medical device;
(k) to label the device, if the device is intended for single use;
(l) to overprint on the label of the container, the words ―FOR CLINICAL INVESTIGATION ONLY‖, if the device is intended for clinical investigation;
(m) to overprint on the label of the device, the words ―Physician‘s Sample—Not to be sold‖, if a medical device is intended for distribution to the medical professional as a free sample;
(n) to provide, except for imported devices, the manufacturing licence number by preceding the words ―Manufacturing Licence Number‖ or ―Mfg. Lic. No.‖ or ―M. L‖;
(o) Devices or In-vitro diagnostics which are not sold to customer or patient directly and are sold for use by hospitals or diagnostic labs shall provide the information affixing additional label or sticker on outer shelf pack;
(p) to provide on the label, in case of imported devices, with the approval of the licensing authority mentioned in rule 21, the import licence number, name and address of the importer and address of the actual manufacturing premises, date of manufacture, (if not already printed at the time of import):
Provided that the label may bear symbols recognised by the Bureau of Indian Standards or International Organisation for Standardisation (ISO) in lieu of text and the device safety is not compromised by a lack of understanding on the part of the user in case the meaning of the symbol is not obvious to the device user.]

1[109B. Exemption of certain labelling requirements for medical devices for export from India.–– The labels on packages or container of devices for export shall be adopted to meet specific requirements of the law of the country to which the device is to be exported, but the following particulars shall appear in conspicuous manner on the label of the shelf pack of the medical device in which the device is packed and every other outer covering in which the container is packed- (a) name of the Device;
(b) the distinctive batch number or lot number preceded by the word ―Lot No.‖ or ―Lot‖ or ―Batch No.‖ or ―B.No.‖;
(c) the date of expiry, if any;
(d) the name and address of the manufacturer and address of actual premises where the device has been manufactured;
(e) the manufacturing Licence No. preceded by the letters ―M.L. No‖ or ―Manufacturing Licence No‖;
(f) the internationally recognised symbols in lieu of text, wherever required:

Provided that where a device is required by the consignee not to be labeled with the name and address of the manufacturer, the label on the packages or container shall bear a code number as approved by the licensing authority and the code number shall bear the name of the State or Union territory, in abbreviation, followed by the word ―Device‖ and ―manufacturing licence number:
Provided further that where a device is required by the consignee not to be labeled with the code number also, the label on the packages or container shall bear a special code number, as requested by the consignee, and approved by the licensing authority under rule 21.]

1[109C. Shelf life of the medical devices.–– The shelf life of the medical devices shall not exceed sixty months from the date of manufacture:
Provided that this period may be extended by the licensing authority, in respect of any specified medical device, if satisfactory evidence is produced by the manufacturer to justify such an extension.]

110. Prohibition of sale of substance after prescribed date.–No person shall sell, or exhibit for sale any substance specified in Schedule C after the date recorded on the container, label or wrapper as the date upto which the substance may be expected to retain a potency not less than, or not to acquire a toxicity greater than that required or permitted by the prescribed test as the case may be.

2 [* * * * *]

2. Rule 110A omitted by G.S.R. 1242(E), dt. 17.9.1979.

1[111. Standards.–Every substance specified in Schedules C and C (1) intended for sale shall conform with the standards of strength, quality and purity specified in these Rules and in Schedule F or F(1), as the case may be, and the tests for determining such conformity shall be applied to samples taken from the final product after every manufacturing process has been completed.]

2[112. Tests for strength and quality.–The tests, if any, required for determining the strength and quality of each of the substances specified in Schedules C and C (1) shall be those set out in Schedule F or Schedule F (1) 4[or as specified, as the case may be].]

3[* * * * *]

115. Application of tests for sterility.–The tests shall be applied−

(a) to samples taken from each batch of the substance before the operation of filling and sealing the containers in which it is to be issued has commenced except preparations, which after being sealed in the containers are to be sterilized by heat, in a manner satisfactory to the Licensing Authority; and

(b) to the contents of sample containers when ready for issue.

4[ * * * * *]

119.−(1) If at this examination no growth of micro-organisms is found in any tube, the sample may be treated as having passed the test.

(2) If at the examination a growth of micro-organisms is visible, further samples may be taken and the tests may be repeated on the further samples taken; but no container the contents of which form part of the batch shall be issued until such further samples have passed the test. The process of taking samples from the batch for a test may be repeated twice:

Provided that if the same organism is visible in more than one test the batch shall be treated as not sterile and the material contained in the batch shall not be issued or used as part of a further batch unless and until it has been re-sterilized and has passed the tests.

120.−Notwithstanding anything contained in the last preceding rule, in any case where—

(a) a substance is required in an emergency by a registered medical practitioner, but the licensee has no filled containers in stock; or

2 Subs. by G.S.R. 663(E), dt. 3.7.1992.
3. Rules 113 and 114 omitted by G.S.R. 663(E),dt. 3.7.1992.
4. Rules 116, 117 and 118 omitted by G.S.R. 663 (E), dt. 3-7-1992.

(b) a substance which in the opinion of the Licensing Authority is so unstable in solution that the delay occasioned by the completing of the sterility test on filled containers would render its issue in active form impossible, the licensee may issue the substance from a batch which has already passed the tests for sterility and freedom from abnormal toxicity, without completing the sterility test on the filled containers, provided that he complies with the following conditions—

(i) the licensee shall before the issue take samples in the required proportion from the containers into which the batch is filled, and after the required inoculation shall examine the tube every day for five days;
(ii) if at any examination any growth is visible in any of the tubes, he shall immediately notify the Licensing Authority;
(iii) he shall keep available for inspection a record of all issues made under this Rule containing such particulars of the circumstances in which the issue is made as the Licensing Authority may require.

1[121. Test for freedom from abnormal toxicity. –The test for freedom from abnormal toxicity shall be carried out as per the current edition of Indian Pharmacopoeia in the case of each batch of the serum tested by the licensee or by an institution approved by the Licensing Authority for the purpose of carrying out the test on its behalf.]

2[121A. Test for pyrogens–Solution of substances intended for parenteral administration in large volumes (10 ml or more at a time) shall be pyrogen-free and tested for pyrogens. If water or any other aqueous solvent is supplied along with the substances for preparing such solutions, it shall also be pyrogen-free and tested for pyrogens.]

122. Substances specified in Schedule C(1). –The following provisions shall apply in the case of a substance specified in Schedule C (1): –

3[(a) The container shall comply with the requirements, if any, specified in Schedule F or Schedule F (1) 4[or as specified], as the case may be.]

5 [* * * * *]

(c) The substance shall conform to the standards of strength, quality and purity specified in Schedule F or Schedule F (1) 4[or as specified], as the case may be and the tests for determining the strength, quality and purity of the substance shall be those specified in Schedule F or Schedule F (1) 4[or as specified,] as the case may be.

(d) The tests for determining the strength, quality and purity of a substance specified in Schedule F or Schedule F (1) 3[or as specified] as the case may be shall be applied to samples taken from the final product after each manufacturing process has been completed.

(e) The substance should be stored in a cool place and away from light.

2. Subs. by SO 1449, dt. 13-06-1961. Earlier Ins. by F.1-27/56-D, dt. 18-12-1956
3. Subs. by F.1-6/62-D, dt. 2-7-1969
4. Subs. by G.S.R. 663 (E), dt. 3-7-1992
5. Omitted by G.S.R. 19, dt. 15.12.1977.

1[PART X A.

IMPORT OF MANUFACTURE OFNEW DRUG FOR CLINICAL
TRIALS OR MARKETING

122-A. Application for permission to import new drug.- 2[(1) (a) No new drug shall be imported, except under, and in accordance with, the permission granted by the Licensing Authority as defined in clause (b) of rule 21.

(b) An application for the grant of permission to import a new drug shall be made in Form 44 to the Licensing Authority, accompanied by a fee of fifty thousand rupees:

Provided that where a subsequent application by the same applicant for that drug, whether in modified dosage form or with new claims, is made, the fee to accompany such application shall be fifteen thousand rupees.

Provided further that any application received after one year of the grant of approval for the import and sale of new drug, shall be accompanied by a fee of fifteen thousand rupees and such information and data as required by 3[Appendix I or Appendix IA or Appendix IB] of Schedule Y, as the case may be].

(2) The importer of a new drug when applying for permission under sub-rule (1), shall submit data as given in 3[Appendix I or Appendix IA or Appendix IB] to Schedule Y including the results of local clinical trials carried out in accordance with the guidelines specified in that Schedule and submit the report of such clinical trials in the format given in appendix II to the said Schedule:

Provided that the requirement of submitting the results of local clinical trials may not be necessary if the drug is of such a nature that the Licensing Authority may, in public interest, decide to grant such permission on the basis of data available from other countries:

Provided further that the submission of requirements relating to Animal Toxicology, Reproduction studies, Teratogenic studies, Perinatal studies, Mutagenicity and Carcinogenicity may be modified or relaxed in case of new drugs approved and marketed for several years in other countries if he is satisfied that there is adequate published evidence regarding the safety of the drug, subject to the other provisions of these rules.

2[(3) The Licensing Authority, after being satisfied that the drug if permitted to be imported as raw material (bulk drug substance) or as finished formulation shall be effective and safe for use in the country, may issue an import permission in Form 45 and/or Form 45A, subject to the conditions stated therein:

Provided that the Licensing Authority shall, where the data provided or generated on the drug is inadequate, intimate the applicant in writing, and the conditions, which shall be satisfied before permission could be considered.]

122-B. Application for approval to manufacture new drug 4[***].- 2[(1)(a) No new drug shall be manufactured for sale unless it is approved by the Licensing Authority as defined in clause (b) of rule 21.

2. Subs. by G.S.R. 900 (E), dt. 12.12.2001.
3. Subs. by G.S.R. 918 (E), dt. 30.11.2005.
4. Omitted by G.S.R. 26 (E), dt. 19.01.2006.

(b) An application for the grant of approval to manufacture the new drug and its formulations shall be made in Form 44 to the Licensing Authority as defined in clause (b) of Rule 21 and shall be accompanied by a fee of fifty thousand rupees:
Provided that where the application is for permission to import a new drug (bulk drug substance) and grant of approval to manufacture its formulation/s, the fee to accompany such application shall be fifty thousand rupees only.
Provided further that where a subsequent application by the same applicant for that drug, whether in modified dosage form or with the new claims, is made, the fee to accompany such subsequent application shall be fifteen thousand rupees:
Provided also that any application received after one year of the grant of approval for the manufacture for sale of the new drug, shall be accompanied by a fee of fifteen thousand rupees and such information and data as required by 4[Appendix 1 or Appendix 1A or Appendix IB] of Schedule Y, as the case may be.]

(2) The manufacturer of a new drug under sub-rule (1) when applying for approval to the Licensing Authority mentioned in the said sub-rule, shall submit data as given in 4[Appendix 1 or Appendix 1A or Appendix IB] to Schedule Y including the results of clinical trials carried out in the country in accordance with the guideline specified in Schedule Y and submit the report of such clinical trials in the same format given in Appendix II to the said Schedule.
1[(2A) The Licensing authority as defined in clause (b) of rule 21 after being satisfied that the drug if approved to be manufactured as raw material (bulk drug substance) or as finished formulation shall be effective and safe for use in the country, shall issue approval in Form 46 and/or Form 46A, as the case may be, subject to the conditions stated therein:
Provided that the Licensing Authority shall, where the data provided or generated on the drug is inadequate, intimate the applicant in writing, and the conditions, which shall be satisfied before permission could be considered.]

(3) When applying for approval to manufacture a new drug under sub-rule (1) or its preparations, to the State Licensing Authority, an applicant shall produce along with his application, evidence that the drug for the manufacture of which application is made has already been approved 5[in the name of the applicant] by the Licensing Authority mentioned in Rule 21:
Provided that the requirement of submitting the results of local clinical trials may not be necessary if the drug is of such nature that the 6[Licensing Authority in Rule 21] may, in public interest, decide to grant such permission on the basis of data available from other countries:
Provided further that the submission of requirements relating to Animal Toxicology, Reproduction studies, Teratogenic studies, Perinatal studies, Mutagenicity and Carnicogenicity may be modified or relaxed in case of new drugs approved and marketed for several years in other countries if he is satisfied that there is adequate published evidence regarding the safety of the drug, subject to the other provisions of these rules.
2 [* * * * *] 3[122D. Permission to import or manufacture fixed dose combination.- (1) An application for permission to import or manufacture fixed dose combination of two or more drugs as defined in clause (c) of rule 122-E shall be made to the Licensing Authority as defined in clause (b) of Rule 21 in Form 44, accompanied by a fee of fifteen thousand rupees and shall be accompanied by such information and data as is required in Appendix VI of Schedule Y.

2. Rules 122-C omitted, by G.S.R. 900(E), dt. 12-12-2001.

(2) The Licensing Authority after being satisfied that the fixed dose combination if approved to be imported or manufactured as finished formulation shall be effective and safe for use in the country, shall issue permission in Form 45 or Form 46, as the case may be, subject to the conditions stated therein:

Provided that the Licensing Authority shall, where the data provided or generated on the fixed dose combination is inadequate, intimate the applicant in writing, and the conditions which shall be satisfied before grant of approval/permission could be considered.

122DA. Application for permission to conduct clinical trials for New Drug/Investigational New Drug.− (1) No clinical trial for a new drug, whether for clinical investigation or any clinical experiment by any institution, shall be conducted except under, and in accordance with, the permission, in writing, of the Licensing Authority defined in clause (b) of Rule 21.

(2) An application for grant of permission to conduct−

(a) human clinical trials (Phase-I) on a new drug shall be made to the Licensing Authority in Form 44 accompanied by a fee of fifty thousand rupees and such information and data as required under Schedule Y.

(b) exploratory clinical trials (Phase-II) on a new drug shall be made on the basis of data emerging from Phase-I trial, accompanied by a fee of twenty-five thousand rupees;

(c) confirmatory clinical trials (Phase-III) on a new drug shall be made on the basis of the data emerging from Phase-II and where necessary, data emerging from Phase-I also, and shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty-five thousand rupees:

Provided that no separate fee shall be required to be paid along with application for import/manufacture of a new drug based on successful completion of phases clinical trials by the applicant:

Provided further that no fee shall be required to be paid along with the application by Central Government or State Government Institutes involved in clinical research for conducting trials for academic or research purposes.

(3) The Licensing Authority after being satisfied with the clinical trials, shall grant permission in Form 45 or Form 45-A or Form 46 or Form 46-A, as the case may be, subject to the conditions stated therein:

Provided that the Licensing Authority shall, where the data provided on the clinical trials is inadequate, intimate the applicant in writing, within six months from the date of such intimation or such extended period, not exceeding a further period of six months, as the Licensing Authority may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, permit, intimating the conditions which shall be satisfied before permission could be considered.

1[(4) No permission for conduct of clinical trial intended for academic purposes in respect of approved drug formulation shall be required for any new indication or new route of administration or new dose or new dosage form where,- (a) the trial is approved by the Ethics Committee; and (b) subject to the provisions of sub-rule 5, the data generated is not intended for submission to licensing authority.

(5) The Ethics Committee shall however inform the licensing authority about the cases approved by it and also about cases where there could be an overlap between the clinical trial for academic and regulatory purposes and where the said authority does not convey its comments to the Ethics Committee within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of communication from the Ethics Committee, it shall be presumed that no permission from the licensing authority is required.]

1[Explanation:- —For the purposes of these rules,— (a) ―Clinical Trial‖ means a systematic study of any new drug(s) in human subject(s) to generate data for discovering and/or verifying the clinical, pharmacological (including pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic), and/or adverse effects with the objective of determining safety and/or efficacy of the new drug;
(b) ―Global Clinical Trial‖ means any clinical trial which is conducted as part of multinational clinical development of a drug;
(c) ―Investigational New Drug‖ means a new chemical entity or a product having therapeutic indication but which has never been tested earlier on human being;
(d) ―New Chemical Entity‖ means an active substances in developmental stage which may be specified as a drug under the Act, after undergoing any clinical trial.]

2[****]

3[122-DAB- Compensation in case of injury or death during clinical trial.- 4[(1) In case of an injury occurring to the subject during the clinical trial, free medical management shall be given as long as required or till such time it is established that the injury is not related to the clinical trial, whichever is earlier.] (2) In case, the injury occurring to the trial subject is related to the clinical trial, such subject shall also be entitled for financial compensation as per order of the Licensing Authority defined under clause (b) of Rule 21, and the financial compensation will be over and above any expenses incurred on the medical management of the subject.
5[(2A) In case, there is no permanent injury, the quantum of compensation shall be commensurate with the nature of the non-permanent injury and loss of wages of the subject.] (3) In the case of clinical trial related death of the subject, his / her nominee(s) would be entitled for financial compensation, as per the order of the Licensing Authority defined under clause (b) of Rule 21 and the financial compensation will be over and above any expenses incurred on the medical management of such subject.
(4) The expenses on medical management and financial compensation in the case of clinical trial injury or death of the trial subject shall be borne by the sponsor of the clinical trial.
(5) Any injury or death of the subject occurring in clinical trial due to following reasons shall be considered as clinical trial related injury or death and the subject or his/her nominees(s), as the case may be, are entitled for financial compensation for such injury or death:
(a) Adverse effect of investigational product(s);
(b) Violation of the approved protocol, scientific misconduct or negligence by the sponsor or his representative or the investigator;
1. Subs. by G.S.R. 826 (E), dt. 30-10-2015 with following explanation.
―Explanation.−For the purpose of these rules Investigational New Drug means a new chemical entity or a product having therapeutic indication but which have never been earlier tested on human beings.‖
2. Omitted rule 122DAA by G.S.R. 826 (E), dt. 30-10-2015, before omission it stood as under:
―122DAA. Definition of Clinical trial.--For the purpose of this Part, ―Clinical trial‖ means a systematic study of new drug(s) in human subject(s) to generate data for discovering and/or verifying the clinical, pharmacological (including pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic) and/or adverse effects with the objective of determining safety and / or efficacy of the new drug.‖

(c) Failure of investigational product to provide intended therapeutic effect, where, the standard care, though available, was not provided to the subject as per the clinical trial protocol;
(d) Use of placebo in a placebo-controlled trial where, the standard care, though available, was not provided to the subject as per the clinical trial protocol;
(e) Adverse effects due to concomitant medication excluding standard care, necessitated as part of approved protocol;
(f) For injury to a child in-utero because of the participation of parent in clinical trail;
(g) Any clinical trial procedures involved in the study.
(6) The sponsor, whether a pharmaceutical company or an institution shall give an undertaking along with the application for clinical trail permission to the Licensing Authority defined in clause (b) of Rule 21, to provide compensation in the case of clinical trial related injury or death for which subjects are entitled to compensation.
(7) In case, the sponsor fails to provide medical management for the injury to the subject and / or financial compensation to the trial subject for clinical trial related injury or financial compensation to the subject‘s nominee(s) in case of clinical trial related death of the subject, the Licensing Authority may after giving an opportunity to show cause why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing, stating the reasons thereof, suspend or cancel the clinical trial and / or restrict Sponsor including his representative(s) to conduct any further clinical trials in the country or take any other action deemed fit under the rules.]

1[122 DAC. Permission to conduct clinical trial:- (1) The Licensing Authority as defined in clause (b) of Rule 21, on being satisfied that the data submitted along with the application in support of the proposed clinical trial is adequate in all respects, issue permission for conduct of clinical trial, subject to the following conditions, namely:- (a) Clinical trial shall be conducted in compliance with the approved protocols, requirements of Schedule Y annexed to these rules, Good Clinical Practice Guidelines for conduct of clinical trials in India and other applicable regulations;
(b) Approval of the Ethics Committee shall be obtained before initiation of the study;
(c) Clinical trial shall be registered at Clinical Trials Registry of India before enrolling the first patient for the study;
(d) Annual status report of each clinical trial, as to whether it is ongoing, completed or terminated, shall be submitted to the Licensing Authority and in case of termination of any clinical trial the detailed reasons for the same shall be communicated to the said Licensing Authority;
(e) Any report of serious adverse event occurring during clinical trial to the subject, after due analysis, shall be forwarded within ten days of its occurrence as per Appendix XI and in compliance with the procedures prescribed in Schedule Y;
(f) In case of an injury or death during the clinical trial to the subject of the clinical trial the applicant shall provide complete medical management and compensation in the case of trial related injury or death in accordance with Rule 122 DAB and the procedures prescribed under Schedule Y, and the details of compensation provided in such cases shall be intimated to the Licensing Authority within thirty days of the receipt of the order of the said authority;
(g) The premises of Sponsor including their employees, subsidiaries and branches, their agents, contractors and sub-contractors and clinical trial sites shall be open to inspection by the officers authorized by the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, who may be accompanied by an officer of the State Drug Control Authority concerned, to verify compliance to the requirements of Schedule Y, Good Clinical Practices guidelines for conduct of clinical trials in India and other applicable regulations;

(h) The Sponsor including their employees, subsidiaries and branches, their agents, contractors and sub-contractors and clinical trial sites and the investigator shall allow officers authorized by the Central Drug Standard Control Organization, who may be accompanied by an officer of the State Drug Control Authority concerned, to enter with or without prior notice, any premises of sponsor including their employees, subsidiaries and branches, their agents, contractors and sub-contractors and clinical trial sites to inspect, search and seize any record, data, document, books, investigational drugs etc. related to clinical trials and provide adequate replies to any queries raised by the inspecting authority in relation to the conduct of clinical trial;
(2) Notwithstanding the conditions specified in sub-Rule (1), the Licensing Authority, on being satisfied that the data submitted along with the application in support of the proposed clinical trial is adequate in all respect, may also impose such additional conditions for issuance of permission in respect of specific clinical trials, if considered necessary, regarding the objective, design, subject population, subject eligibility, assessments, conduct and treatment of such clinical trial.
(3) If any Sponsor including their employees, subsidiaries and branches, their agents, contractors and sub-contractors, Investigators conducting clinical trial and clinical trial sites fail to comply with any of the above conditions, the Licensing Authority, may, after giving an opportunity to show cause why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing stating the reasons thereof,- (a) Issue warning letter giving details of deficiency found during the inspection, which might affect the right or well-being of the clinical trial subject or the validity of the study conducted at that site;
(b) Recommend that study may be rejected or discontinued;
(c) Suspend or cancel the clinical trial permission;
(d) Debar the Investigator(s), Sponsor including their employees, subsidiaries and branches, their agents, contractors and sub-contractors to conduct any clinical trial in future.
(4) The Sponsor including their employees, subsidiaries and branches, their agents, contractors and sub-contractors and clinical trial Investigators, against whom action as mentioned in sub- Rule (3) has been taken by the Licensing Authority, may, within ninety days of the receipt of the copy of the order of the Licensing Authority prefer an appeal to the Central Government, and the Central Government may, after giving such appellant an opportunity of being heard, confirm, reverse or modify such order.]

122DB. Suspension or cancellation of Permission/Approval.- If the importer or manufacturer under this Part fails to comply with any of the conditions of the permission or approval, the Licensing Authority may, after giving an opportunity to show cause why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing stating the reasons therefor, suspend or cancel it.

122DC. Appeal.- Any person aggrieved by an order passed by the Licensing Authority under this Part, may within sixty days from the date of such order, appeal to the Central Government, and the Central Government may, after such enquiry into the matter as is considered necessary, pass such order in relation thereto as it thinks fit.

1[122 DD. Registration of Ethics Committee:- (1) No Ethics Committee shall review and accord its approval to a clinical trial protocol without prior registration with the Licensing Authority as defined in clause (b) of Rule21:
Provided that any Ethics Committee, existing on the date of commencement of the Drugs and Cosmetics (Third Amendment) Rules, 2013, who has already reviewed and accorded approval to clinical trial protocol, shall obtain registration within a period of fortyfive days from the date of commencement of Drugs and Cosmetics (Third Amendment) Rules,

(2) An application for registration of Ethics Committee shall be made to the Licensing Authority in accordance with the requirements as specified in the Appendix VIII of Schedule Y.
(3) The Licensing Authority after being satisfied that the requirements have been complied with, may grant registration to the Ethics Committee subject to such conditions as may be stated therein.
(4) The Ethics Committee shall review and accord its approval to a clinical trial and also carry ongoing review of the trial at appropriate intervals, as specified in Schedule Y, and the Good Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clinical Trials in India and other applicable regulatory requirements for safeguarding the rights, safety and well-being of the trial subjects.
(5) In the case of any serious adverse event occurring to the clinical trial subjects during the clinical trial, the Ethics Committee shall analyze and forward its opinion as per procedure specified under APPENDIX XII of Schedule Y.
(6) The Ethics Committee shall allow inspectors or officials authorized by the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization to enter its premises to inspect any record, data or any document related to clinical trial and provide adequate replies to any query raised by such inspectors or officials, as the case may be in relation to the conduct of clinical trial.
(7) The registration, unless it is suspended or cancelled, shall be valid for a period of three years from the date of issue:
Provided that if the application for re-registration is received by the Licensing Authority within three months before the expiry, the registration shall continue to be in force until orders are passed by the said authority:
Provided further that the Licensing Authority shall be informed in writing in case of any change in the membership or the constitution of the Ethics Committee takes place.
(8) If the Licensing Authority is not satisfied, he shall reject the application and shall inform the applicant of the reasons for such rejection and the conditions which must be satisfied before the registration can be granted.
(9) If the Ethics Committee fails to comply with any of the conditions of registration, the Licensing Authority may, after giving an opportunity to show cause why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing stating the reasons therefor, suspend or cancel the registration of the Ethics Committee for such period as considered necessary.
(10) The Ethics Committee whose registration has been suspended or cancelled by the Licensing Authority, may, within ninety days of the receipt of the copy of the order, prefer an appeal to the Central Government and the Central Government may after giving an opportunity of being heard, confirm, reverse or modify such order.
Explanation:- For the purpose of this Rule an Ethics Committee is a committee comprising of medical, scientific, non-medical and nonscientific members, whose responsibility is to ensure the protection of the rights, safety and will-being of human subjects involved in a clinical trial and it shall be responsible for reviewing and approving the protocol, the suitability of the investigators, facilities, methods and adequacy of information to be used for obtaining and documenting informed consent of the study subjects and adequacy of confidentiality safeguards.]

122E. Definition of new drug.- For the purpose of this Part, new drug shall mean and include1[(a) A drug, as defined in the Act including bulk drug substance 2[or phytopharmaceutical drug] which has not been used in the country to any significant extent under the conditions prescribed, recommended or suggested in the labelling thereof and has not been recognized as effective and safe by the licensing authority mentioned under rule 21 for the proposed claims:

Provided that the limited use, if any, has been with the permission of the licensing authority.]

(b) A drug already approved by the Licensing Authority mentioned in Rule 21 for certain claims, which is now proposed to be marketed with modified or new claims, namely, indications, dosage, dosage form (including sustained release dosage form) and route of administration.

(c) A fixed dose combination of two or more drugs, individually approved earlier for certain claims, which are now proposed to be combined for the first time in a fixed ratio, or if the ratio of ingredients in an already marketed combination is proposed to be changed, with certain claims, viz. indications, dosage, dosage form (including sustained release dosage form) and route of administration. (See items (b) and (c) of Appendix VI to Schedule Y.)

Explanation.- For the purpose of this rule−

1[(i) all vaccines and Recombinant DNA (r-DNA) derived drugs shall be new drugs unless certified otherwise by the Licensing Authority under Rule 21;]

(ii) a new drug shall continue to be considered as new drug for a period of four years from the date of its first approval 2[***].]

2. Omitted by G.S.R. 724(E), dt. 7.11.2013, the following words,- ―or its inclusion in the Indian Pharmacopoeia Whichever is earlier‖.

1[PART XB

REQUIREMENTS FOR THE COLLECTION, STORAGE, PROCESSING AND DISTRIBUTION OF WHOLE HUMAN BLOOD,
HUMAN BLOOD COMPONENTS BY BLOOD BANKS ANDMANUFACTURE OF BLOOD PRODUCTS 2[122EA. Definitions.- (1) In this Part and in the Forms contained in Schedule A and in Part XII-B, 3[Part XII-C and Part XIID] of Schedule F, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context−

(a) ―apheresis‖ means the process by which blood drawn from a donor, after separating plasma or platelets, or leucocytes, is re-transfused simultaneously into the said donor;

(b) ―autologous blood‖ means the blood drawn from the patient for re-transfusion unto himself later on;

(c) ―blood‖ means and includes whole human blood, drawn from a donor and mixed with an anti-coagulant;

(d) ―blood bank‖ means a place or organization or unit or institution or other arrangements made by such organization, unit or institution for carrying out all or any of the operations for collection, apheresis, storage, processing and distribution of blood drawn from donors and/or for preparation, storage and distribution of blood components;

(e) ―blood component‖ means a drug prepared, obtained, derived or separated from a unit of blood drawn from a donor;

(f) ―blood product‖ means a drug manufactured or obtained from pooled plasma of blood by fractionation, drawn from donors;
4[(fa) ―cord blood bank‖ means a place or organization or unit for carrying out and responsible for operations of collection, processing, testing, banking, selection and release of cord blood units;] (g) ―donor‖ means a person who voluntarily donates blood after he has been declared fit after a medical examination, for donating blood, on fulfilling the criteria given hereinafter, without accepting in return any consideration in cash or in kind from any source but does not include a professional or a paid donor.

Explanation.- For the purposes of this clause, benefits or incentives like pins, plaques, badges, medals, commendation certificates, time-off from work, membership of blood assurance programme, gifts of little or intrinsic monetary value shall not be construed as consideration;

(h) ―leucapheresis‖ means the process by which the blood drawn from a donor, after leucocyte concentrates have been separarated is re-transfused simultaneously into the said donor;

(i) ―plasmapheresis‖ means the process by which the blood drawn from a donor, after plasma has been separated, is re-transfused during the same sitting into the said donor;

(j) ―plateletpheresis‖ means the process by which the blood drawn from a donor, after platelet concentrates have been separated, is re-transfused simultaneously into the said donor;

(k) ―professional donor‖ means a person who donates blood for a valuable consideration, in cash or kind, from any source, on behalf of the recipient-patient and includes a paid donor or a commercial donor;
(l) ―replacement donor‖ means a donor who is a family friend or a relative of the patient-recipient.]

4[(m) ―umbilical cord blood‖ is the whole blood including Hematopoietic Progenitor Cells collected from placental and or Umbilical cord blood vessels after the umbilical cord have been clamped.]

122-F. Form of application for licence for operation of Blood Bank/processing of whole human blood for components/manufacture of blood products for sale or distribution 4[, collection, processing, testing, storage, banking and release of umbilical cord blood stem cells.]- (1) Application for the grant and/or renewal of licence for the operation of a Blood Bank/processing of human blood for components/manufacture of blood products 4 [ collection, processing, testing, storage, banking and release of umbilical cord blood stem cells] shall be made to the Licensing Authority appointed under Part VII in 1[Form 27C or 5[Form 27-E or Form 27-F], as the case may be], and shall be accompanied by 3[licence fee of rupees six thousand and an inspection fee of rupees one thousand and five hundred for every inspection thereof or for the purpose of renewal of licence]:

Provided that if the applicant applies for renewal of licence after its expiry but within six months of such expiry the fee payable for the renewal of the licence 3[shall be rupees six thousand and inspection fee of rupees one thousand and five hundred plus an additional fee at the rate of rupees one thousand per month or a part thereof in addition to the inspection fee]:

5[Provided further that a licensee holding a license in Form 28-C, Form 28-E or Form 28F as the case may be, for operation of Blood Bank/ processing of whole human blood for components / manufacture of blood products / collection, processing testing storage, banking and release of umbilical cord blood stem cells shall apply for grant of license under sub Rule (1) before the expiry of the said license in Form 27-C, Form 27-E or Form 27-F as the case may be and he shall continue to operate the same till the orders on his application are communicated to him.] 2[***] (2) A fee of 3[rupees one thousand] shall be paid for a duplicate copy of a licence issued under this rule, if the original is defaced, damaged or lost.

(3) Application by a licensee to manufacture additional drugs listed in the application shall be accompanied by a fee of 3[rupees three hundred] for each drug listed in the application.

(4) On receipt of the application for the grant or renewal of such licence, the Licensing Authority shall,–

(i) verify the statements made in the application form;
(ii) cause the manufacturing and testing establishment to be inspected in accordance with the provision of rule 122-I; and (iii) in case the application is for renewal of licence, call for information of past performance of the licensee.

(5) If the Licensing Authority is satisfied that the applicant is in a position to fulfil the requirements laid down in the rules, he shall prepare a report to that effect and forward it 6[along with the application and the licence (in triplicate) to be granted or renewed, duly completed] to the Central Licence Approving Authority:

Provided that if the Licensing Authority is of the opinion that the applicant is not in a position to fulfil the requirements laid down in these rules, he may, by order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, refuse to grant or renew the licence, as the case may be.

(6) If, on receipt of the application and report of the Licensing Authority referred to in sub-rule 7[(5)] and after taking such measures including inspection of the premises by the Inspector, appointed by the Central Government under section 21 of the Act, and/or along

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 245(E), dt. 5.4.1999. 4. Ins. by G.S.R. 899 (E), dt. 27-12-2011.
2. Explanation omitted by G.S.R. 733 (E), dt. 21.12.2005 earlier Ins. by G.S.R. 89(E), dt. 14-2-1996.
3. Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dt. 24-8-2001. 5. Subs. by G.S.R. 899 (E), dt. 27-12-2011.
7. Corrected by corrigendum G.S.R. 447 (E), dt. 10-06-1993.

with the Expert in the field concerned if deemed necessary, the Central Licence Approving Authority is satisfied that the applicant is in a position to fulfil the requirements laid down in these rules, he may grant or renew the licence, as the case may be:
Provided that if the Central Licence Approving Authority is of the opinion that the applicant is not in a position to fulfil the requirements laid down in these rules he may, notwithstanding the report of the Licensing Authority, by order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, reject the application for grant or renewal of licence, as the case may be, and shall supply the applicant with a copy of the inspection report.

122G. Form of Licence for the operation of a Blood Bank/processing of whole human blood for components and manufacture of blood products 3[/manufacture of blood products/collection, processing, testing, storage, banking and release of umbilical cord blood stem cells] and the conditions for the grant or renewal of such licence.− 2[(1)] A licence for the operation of a Blood Bank or for processing whole human blood for components and 3[/manufacture of blood products/collection, processing, testing, storage, banking and release of umbilical cord blood stem cells] shall be issued in 1[Form 28C or Form 28E or 3[Form 28F or Form 26G or Form26-I or Form 26J, as the case may be, before a license in Form 28C or Form 28E or Form28-F or Form 26G or Form 26-I or Form 26-J], as the case may be,] is granted or renewed the following conditions shall be complied with by the applicant:- 1[(i) The operation of Blood Bank and/or processing of whole human blood for components shall be conducted under the active direction and personal supervision of competent technical staff consisting of at least one person who is whole time employee and who is Medical Officer, and possessing- (a) Postgraduate degree in Medicine - M.D (Pathology/Transfusion Medicines); or

(b) Degree in Medicine (M.B.B.S.) with Diploma in Pathology or Transfusion Medicines having adequate knowledge in blood group serology, blood group methodology and medical principles involved in the procurement of blood and/or preparation of its components; or

(c) Degree in Medicine (M.B.B.S.) having experience in Blood Bank for one year during regular service and also has adequate knowledge and experience in blood group serology, blood group methodology and medical principles involved in the procurement of blood and/or preparation of its components,

the degree or diploma being from a University recognized by the Central Government.

Explanation.- For the purposes of this condition, the experience in Blood Bank for one year shall not apply in the case of persons who are approved by the Licensing Authority and/or Central Licence Approving Authority prior to the commencement of the Drugs and Cosmetics (Second Amendment) Rules, 1999].

(ii) The applicant shall provide adequate space, plant and equipment for any or all the operations of blood collection or blood processing. The space, plant and equipment required for various operation is given in Schedule ̳F‘, Part XIIB and/or XIIC 4[or XIID].

(iii) The applicant shall provide and maintain adequate technical staff as specified in Schedule F, Part XIIB and/or XIIC 4[or XIID].
(iv) The applicant shall provide adequate arrangements for storage of whole human blood, human blood components and blood products.

(v) The applicant shall furnish to the Licensing Authority, if required to do so, data on the stability of whole human blood, its components or blood products which are likely to deteriorate, for fixing the date of expiry which shall be printed on the labels of such products on the basis of the data so furnished.

1. Ins. by GSR 245(E), dt. 5-4-1999.
2. Renumbered as sub-rule (1) by GSR 733(E), dt. 21-12-2005.
3. Subs. by GSR 899(E), dt. 27-12-2011. 4. Ins. by GSR 899(E), dt. 27-12-2011.

3[(2) Application for grant or renewal of a licence for operation of Blood Bank or processing of human blood components shall be made by the Blood Bank run by the Government, Indian Red Cross Society, hospital, charitable trust or voluntary organization approved by a State/ Union Territory Blood Transfusion Council only.
Explanation.– For the purpose of this sub-rule, ―renewal‖ shall include renewal of any licenceissued prior to the commencement of the Drugs and Cosmetics (...Amendment) Rules,2005.]

122H. Duration of licence.- An original licence in 1[Form 28C or Form 28E 4[or Form 28F] or a renewed licence in Form 26G or Form 26-I] 4[or Form 26J] unless sooner suspended or cancelled shall be 2[valid for a period of five years on and from the date on which] it is granted or renewed.

122-I. Inspection before grant or renewal of licence for operation of Blood Bank, processing of whole human blood for components and manufacture of blood products.- Before a licence in 1[Form 28C or Form 28E 4[or Form 28F] is granted or a renewal of licence in form 26G or Form 26-I 4[or Form 26J] is made, as the case may be,] the Licensing Authority or the Central Licence Approving Authority, as the case may be, shall cause the establishment in which Blood Bank is proposed to be operated/whole human blood for components is processed/ blood products are manufactured to be inspected by one or more Inspectors, appointed under the Act and/or along with the Expert in the field concerned.
The Inspector or Inspectors shall examine all portions of the premises and appliances/equipments and inspect the process of manufacture intended to be employed or being employed along with the means to be employed or being employed for operation of blood bank/processing of whole human blood for components/manufacture of blood products together with their testing facilities and also enquire into the professional qualification of the expert staff and other technical staff to be employed.

122J. Report by Inspector.-The Inspector or Inspectors shall forward a detailed descriptive report giving his findings on each aspect of inspection along with his recommendation in accordance with the provisions of rule 122-I to the Licensing Authority or to the Central Licence Approving Authority.

122K. Further application after rejection.- If within a period of six months from the rejection of application of a licence the applicant informs the Licensing Authority that the conditions laid down have been satisfied and deposits an inspection 2[fee of rupees two hundred and fifty] the Licensing Authority may, if after causing further inspection to be made is satisfied that the conditions for the 1[grant or renewal of a licence have been complied with, shall grant or renew the licence in Form 28C or Form 28E 4[or Form 28F]:
Provided that in the case of a drug notified by the Central Government under rule 68-A, the application, together with the inspection report and the Form of licence (in triplicate to be granted or renewed), duly completed shall be sent, to the Central Licence Approving Authority, who may approve the same and return it to the Licensing Authority for issue of the licence.]

122L. Delegation of powers by the Central Licence Approving Authority.- The Central Licence Approving Authority may, with the approval of the Central Government, by notification delegate his powers of signing licences and any other power under rules to persons under his control having same qualifications as prescribed for Controlling Authority under rule 50-A, for such areas and for such periods as may be specified.

122M. Provision for appeal to the State Government by a party whose licence has not been granted or renewed.- Any person who is aggrieved by the order passed by the Licensing Authority or Central Licence Approving Authority, as the case may be, may within thirty days from the date of receipt of such order, appeal to the State Government or Central Government, as the case may be, after such enquiry into the matter as it considers necessary and after giving the said person an opportunity for representing his view in the matter may pass such order in relation thereto as it thinks fit.

1. Ins. by G.S.R 245(E), dt. 5-4-1999. 3. Ins. by G.S.R 733(E), dt. 21-12-2005.
2. Subs. by G.S.R 601(E), dt. 24-8-2001. 4. Ins. by GSR 899(E), dt. 27-12-2011.

122-N. Additional information to be furnished by an applicant for licence or by a licensee to the Licensing Authority.- The applicant for the grant of licence or any person granted a licence under the Part shall, on demand furnish to the Licensing Authority, before the grant of the licence or during the period the licence is in force, as the case may be, documentary evidence in respect of the ownership or occupation, rental or other basis of the premises, specified in the application for licence or in the licence granted, constitution of the firm or any other relevant matter, which may be required for the purpose of verifying the correctness of the statement made by the applicant or the licensee, while applying for or after obtaining the licence, as the case may be.

122-O. Cancellation and suspension of licences.− (1) The Licensing Authority or Central Licence Approving Authority may for such licences granted or renewed by him after giving the licensee an opportunity to show cause why such an order should not be passed by an order in writing stating the reason thereof, cancel a licence issued under this part or suspend it for such period as he thinks fit, either wholly or in respect of some of the substances to which it relates 1[or direct the licensee to stop collection, storage, processing, manufacture and distribution of the said substances and 2[thereupon order the destruction of substances and] stocks thereof in the presence of an Inspector], if in his opinion, the licensee has failed to comply with any of the conditions of the licence or with any provisions of the Act or Rules thereunder.

(2) A licensee whose licence has been suspended or cancelled may, within three months of the date of the order under sub-rule (1) prefer an appeal against the order to the State Government or Central Government, which shall decide the same.

122-P. Conditions of licence.- 3[A licence in Form 28C, Form 28E, 4[Form 28F, Form 26G, Form 26-I or Form 28J shall be subject to the special conditions set out in Schedule F, Part XII-B and Part XII C, Part XIID,] as the case may be, which relate to the substance in respect of which the licence is granted or renewed and to the following general conditions, namely:-]

(i) (a) The licensee shall provide and maintain adequate staff, plant and premises for the proper operation of a Blood Bank for processing whole human blood, its components and/or manufacture of blood products.

(b) The licensee shall maintain staff, premises and equipment as specified in Rule 122-G. The licensee shall maintain necessary records and registers as specified in Schedule F, Parts XII-B and XII-C.

(c) The licensee shall test in his own laboratory whole human blood, its components and blood products and maintain records and registers in respect of such tests as specified in Schedule F, Parts XIIB and XIIC 5[or XIID]. The records and register shall be maintained for a period of five years from the date of manufacture.
(d) The licensee shall maintain/preserve reference sample and supply to the Inspector the reference sample of the whole human blood collected by him in an adequate quantity to conduct all the prescribed tests. The licensee shall supply to the Inspector the reference sample for the purpose of testing.

2. Ins. by (Corrigenda) G.S.R. 514 (E), dt. 6-11-1996.
4. Subs. by GSR 899(E), dt. 27-12-2011.
5. Ins. by GSR 899(E), dt. 27-12-2011.

(ii) The licensee shall allow an Inspector appointed under the Act to enter, with or without prior notice, any premises where the activities of the Blood Bank are being carried out for the processing of Whole Human Blood and/or Blood Products, to inspect the premises and plant and the process of manufacture and the means employed for standardizing and testing the substance.

(iii) The licensee shall allow an Inspector appointed under the Act to inspect all registers and records maintained under these rules and to take samples of the manufactured product and shall supply to the Inspector such information as he may require for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of the Act and rules thereunder have been observed.

(iv) The licensee shall from time to time report to the Licensing Authority any changes in the expert staff responsible for the operation of a Blood Bank/processing of whole human blood for components and/or manufacture of blood products and any material alterations in the premises or plant used for that purpose which have been made since the date of last inspection made on behalf of the Licensing Authority before the grant of the licence.

(v) The licensee shall on request furnish to the Licensing Authority, or Central Licence Approving Authority or to such Authority as the Licensing Authority, or the Central Licence Approving Authority may direct, from any batch unit of drugs as the Licensing Authority or Central Licence Approving Authority may from time to time specify, sample of such quantity as may be considered adequate by such Authority for any examination and, if so required, also furnish full protocols of the test which have been applied.

(vi) If the Licensing Authority or the Central Licence Approving Authority so directs, the licensee shall not sell or offer for sale any batch/unit in respect of which a sample is, or protocols are furnished under the last preceding sub-paragraph until a certificate authorizing the sales of batch/unit has been issued to him by or on behalf of the Licensing Authority or the Central Licence Approving Authority.

(vii) The licensee shall on being informed by the Licensing Authority or the Controlling Authority that any part of any batch/unit of the substance has been found by the Licensing Authority or the Central Licence Approving Authority not to conform with the standards of strength, quality or purity specified in these Rules and on being directed so to do, withdraw, from sales and so far as may in the particular circumstances of the case be practicable recall all issues already made from that batch/unit.

(viii) No drug manufactured under the licence shall be sold unless the precautions necessary for preserving its properties have been observed throughout the period after manufacture. Further no batch/unit manufactured under this licence shall be supplied/distributed to any person without prescription of a Registered Medical Practitioner.

(ix) The licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Act and of these Rules and with such further requirements, if any, as may be specified in any Rules subsequently made under Chapter IV of the Act, provided that where such further requirements are specified in the Rules, these would come in force four months after publication in the Official Gazette.

(x) The licensee shall maintain an Inspection Book in Form 35 to enable an Inspector to record his impression and defects noticed.

(xi) The licensee shall destroy the stock of batch/unit which does not comply with standard tests in such a way that it would not spread any disease/infection by way of proper disinfection method.

1[(xii) All bio-medical waste shall be treated, disposed of or destroyed as per the provisions of the Bio-Medical Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules,

(xiii) The licensee shall neither collect blood from any professional donor or paid donor nor shall he prepare blood components and/or manufacture blood products from the blood drawn from such a donor.]

PART XI
EXEMPTIONS
123. The drugs specified in Schedule K shall be exempted from the provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the Rules made thereunder to the extent and subject to the conditions specified in that Schedule.

PART XII

2[124. Standards of drugs: –
STANDARDS

(1) For drugs included in the Indian Pharmacopoeia—

(a) The standards for identity, purity and strength shall be those as may be specified in the edition of the Indian Pharmacopoeia for the time being in force.

(b) In case the standards for identity, purity and strength for drugs are not specified in the edition of the Indian Pharmacopoeia for the time being in force but are specified in the edition of the Indian Pharmacopoeia immediately preceding, the standards for identity, purity and strength shall be those occurring in such immediately preceding edition of the Indian Pharmacopoeia.

(2) For other drugs–

(a) The standards for identity, purity and strength shall be those as may be specified in the edition of the official pharmacopoeia, for the time being in force, of any country to which the drug claims to comply with,

(b) In case the standards for identity, purity and strength for drugs are not specified in the edition of such official pharmacopoeia for the time being in force, but are specified in the edition immediately preceding, the standards for identity, purity and strength shall be those occurring in such immediately preceding edition of such official pharmacopoeia to which the drug claims to comply with.

(c) For drugs for which standards are not included in the edition of the official pharmacopoeia, for the time being in force, of any country or in edition immediately preceding, but included in the official compendia of drug standards, namely, the British Pharmaceutical Codex or the National Formulary of the United States, for the time being in force, to which the drug claims to comply with.]

3[124A. Standards for veterinary drugs. –For drugs intended for veterinary use, the standards shall be those given in the current edition for the time being in force of the 4[British Pharmacopoeia (Veterinary)].

3. Ins. by notification F. 1-6/62-D (SO 2889), dt. 2-7-1969.

1[124B. Standards for patent or proprietary medicines.— The standards for patent or proprietary medicines shall be those laid down in Schedule V and such medicines shall also comply with the standards laid down in the Second Schedule to the Act.

2[124C. Standards for Surgical Dressings.-The standards for Surgical Dressings shall be such as are laid down in Schedule F (II).]

3[124D. Standards for Sterilised Umbilical tapes.- The standards for Sterilised Umbilical tapes shall be as laid down in Schedule F(III).]

4[125. Standards for substances (other than food) intended to affect the structure or any function of human body—contraceptives.—(1) The standards for mechanical contraceptives shall be such as are laid down in Schedule R.

(2) The standards which other contraceptives will have to comply with shall be in conformity with the formulae approved as safe and efficacious by the Central Government.
Such formula shall be displayed on the label of every container of such contraceptive.

5[125A. Standards for Medical Devices. —The standards for the Medical Devices shall be such as are laid down in Schedule R-1.]

6[126. Standards for substances intended to be used for the destruction of vermin or insects which cause 9[***] disease in human beings or animals.- Disinfectants.

The standards of disinfectants shall be such as are laid down in Schedule O.]

7[126A Standards for ophthalmic preparations 8[including Homoeopathic ophthalmic preparations].—The standards for ophthalmic preparations 8[including Homoeopathic ophthalmic preparations] shall be those laid down in Schedule FF, and such preparations shall also comply with the standards set out in the Second Schedule to the Act.]

4. Amended by F-1-28/65D (SO 886), dt. 8-3-1966.
6. Amended by F.1-20/60-D, dt. 24-1-1964.
7. Ins. by F 1-113/60-D (SO 23), dt. 23-12-1969.
9. Subs heading ―Insecticides‖ and the entry relating thereto omitted by GSR 139, dt. 8-1-1976.

1[127. List of colours permitted to be used in drugs.−(1) No drug shall contain a colour other than specified below :-

(1) Natural Colours Annatto Carotene Chlorophyll Cochineal Curcumin Red Oxide of iron Yellow Oxide of iron 2 [Titanium Oxide] 3[Black Oxide of iron] 6[Titanium dioxide coated mica pearlescent pigments] (2) Artificial Colours Caramel 4[Riboflavin] (3) Coal Tar Colours

Common name of the colour Colour Index Number Chemical Name

GREEN Quinazarine Green S.S.

1, 4-bis (p-Toluino) anthraquinone.
Alizarin Cyanine Green F.

Disodium salt of 1, 4-bis (O-sulfo-pToluino) anthra-quinone.
2[Fast Green F.C.F.

Disodium salt of 4-{[4-(N-ethyl-p Sulfobenzylamino)-phenyl-]-(4-hydroxy2- sulfoniumphenyl)-methylene} [1-(N-ethyl-N-p-sulfobenzyl]∆ 2, 5-cyclohexadienimine].

5[** * * *]

YELLOW Tartrazine 19140 Trisodium salt of 3-carboxy-5- hydroxy-lp-sulfophenyl-4-p- Sulfophenyl azopyrazole.

Sunset Yellow FCF 15985 Disodium salt of 1-p-sulfophenyl azo-2naphthol-6-sulfonic acid.

1. Amended by S.O. 289, dt. 20-12-1972.
2. Ins. by X.11013/3/76-DM.S (SO 1074), dt. 19-8-1978.
5. ―Green S‖ omitted by G.S.R. 753 (E), dt. 4-11-1999.

(1) (2) (3)

1[Quinoline Yellow WS 47005 Disodium salt of disulfonic acid of 2(2quinolyl)-1, 3-indandione.]

RED 2[** ** *]

Erythrosine 45430 Disodium salt of 9-0-carboxyphenyl 6-hydroxy 2,4-5,7-tetriodo-3-isoxanthone

Eosin YS or Eosine G 45380 Disodium of salt of 2,4,5, 7-Tetrabromo- 9-pcarboxyphenyl-6-hydroxy 3-isoxanthone.

Toney Red or Sudan III 26100 1-p-phenylazophenylaze-2-naphthol.
Ponceau 4 R 16255 Trisodium salt of 1-(4-sulpho-1-1- Napthylazo)- 2 napthol-6 : 8-disulphonic acid.

Carmoisine 14720 Disodium salt of 2-(4-sulpho-1-napthylazo)-1 napthol-4 sulphonic acid.

3[*** * *]

BLUE

Indigo Carmine

73015 Disodium salt of indigotin-5 : 5 Disu lphonic Acid

4[Brilliant Blue FCF 42090 Disodium salt of 4-[ {4-(N-ethyl-psulfobenzylamino)-phenyl }-](2- sulfonium phenyl)-methylene)-1-(N- ethyl-N-psulfobenzyl)- ∆ 2, 5-cyclohexadienimine.

ORANGE Orange G 16230 Disodium salt of 1-phenylazo-2- naphthol-6, 8disulfonic acid.

BROWN Resorcin Brown 20170 Monosodium salt of 4-p-sulfophenylazo-2-(2, 4xylylazo-1, 3 resorcinol.

BLACK Naphthol Blue Balck 20470 Disodium salt of 8-amino-7-p-nitro- phenylazo2-phenylazo-1-naphthol-3, 6-disulfonic acid.

2. ̳Amaranth‘ omitted by G.S.R. 753(E) dt. 4.11.1999.
3. Fast Red omitted by G.S.R. 753, dt. 4-11-1999.
4. Ins. by X.11013/3/76-DM.S, dt. 19-8-1978.

(4) LAKES

The aluminum or calcium salts (lakes) of any of the water-soluble colours listed above:
5[Provided that disinfectants may also contain colours specified under Schedule Q, which are non-staining.]

(2) The label on the container of a drug containing a permitted colour shall indicate the common name of the colour.]

128. The following rules are hereby repealed except as respects things done or omitted to be done under these rules, namely :--- Andhra Pradesh Drugs Rules, 1945.
Assam Drugs Rules, 1945.
Bihar Drugs Rules, 1945.
Bombay Drugs Rules, 1946.
East Punjab Drugs Rules, 1945.
C.P. & Berar Drugs Rules, 1945.
Madras Drugs Rules, 1945.
Orissa Drugs Rules, 1945.
Rajasthan Drugs Rules, 1953.
Saurashtra Drugs Rules, 1953.
Travancore-Cohin Drugs Rules, 1953.
United Provinces Drugs Rules, 1945.
West Bengal Drugs Rules, 1946.
2[Mysore Drugs Rules, 1954].

1[PART XIII 3[IMPORT AND REGISTRATION OF COSMETICS]

4[129. Registration of cosmetic products imported into the country.- No cosmetic shall be imported into India unless the product is registered under the rules by the licensing authority appointed by the Central Government under rule 21 or by any person to whom such powers may be delegated under rule 22.

129A. Form and manner of application for Registration Certificate.- (1) An application for issue of a Registration Certificate for cosmetics intended to be imported into India shall be made in Form 42 either by the manufacturer himself or by his authorised agent or importer in India or by the subsidiary in India authorised by the manufacturer and shall be accompanied by a fee of two hundred and fifty US dollars or its equivalent to Indian rupees for each brand of cosmetic. The application shall be accompanied by a treasury challan as specified in subrule (3) along with the information and undertaking as specified in Schedule D (III) duly signed by or on behalf of the manufacturer or by his authorised agent or importer in India or by the subsidiary in India authorised by the manufacturer.

1. Ins. by G.S.R. 1183 dt. 17-8-1964. 5. Ins. by G.S.R. 76 (E), dt. 8-2-2012.
2. Added by notification F. 1-37/58-D, dt. 21-7-1958.
4. Rules 129 to 129H subs. by G.S.R. 426 (E), dt. 19-5-2010.

(2) An authorisation by the manufacturer to his agent in India shall be duly authenticated either in India before a First Class Magistrate or in the country of origin before such an equivalent authority.
(3) The fees shall be paid through a challan in the designated branches of Bank of Baroda either in US dollars or in equivalent Indian rupees under Head of Account ―0210-MEDICAL AND PUBLIC HEALTH, 04 PUBLIC HEALTH, 104-FEES AND FINES‖ and the original copy of the treasury challan shall be submitted along with the application for product registration.
Provided that in the case of any direct payment of fees by a manufacturer in the country of origin, the fees shall be paid through Electronic Clearance System (ECS) from any bank in the country of origin to the Bank of Baroda, Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New Delhi, through the Electronic Code of the bank in the Head of Account ―0210-MEDICALAND PUBLIC HEALTH, 04 PUBLIC HEALTH, 104-FEES AND FINES‖ and the original receipt of the said transfer shall be treated as an equivalent to the bank challan subject to the approval by the Bank of Baroda that they have received the payment.
(4) The applicant shall be liable for the payment of testing fees directly to a testing laboratory approved by the Central Government, as may be, required for examination, tests and analysis of cosmetics.
(5) A fee of one hundred US dollars or its equivalent shall be paid for a duplicate copy of the Registration Certificate, if the original is defaced, damaged or lost.

129B. Registration Certificate for the import of cosmetics manufactured by one manufacturer.-A single application may be made and a single Registration Certificate in Form 43 may be issued in respect of import of one or more than one cosmetics manufactured by the same manufacturer: Provided that the cosmetics are manufactured at one factory or more than one factory functioning conjointly as a single manufacturing unit.

129C. Grant of Registration Certificate.- (1) On receipt of an application for Registration Certificate in the form and manner specified in rule 129A, the licensing authority shall, if satisfied, issue a Registration Certificate in form 43 subject to the conditions of the registration certificates in form 43:
Provided that if the application is complete in all respects and information specified in Schedule D III is in order, the licensing authority shall, within six months from the date of receipt of an application, issue such Registration Certificate, and in exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be recorded in writing, the Registration Certificate may be issued within such extended period, not exceeding three months, as the licensing authority may deem fit.
(2) If the applicant does not receive the Registration Certificate within the period as specified above, he may appeal to the Central Government and the Central Government may after such enquiry into the matter, as it considers necessary, may pass such orders in relation thereto as it thinks fit.

129D. Duration of Registration Certificate.- A Registration Certificate, unless it is sooner suspended or cancelled, shall be valid for a period of three years from the date of its issue:
Provided that if application for a fresh Registration Certificate is made within six months before the expiry of the said certificate, the existing Registration Certificate shall be deemed to continue to remain in force until orders are passed on the application.

129E. Suspension and cancellation of Registration Certificate.- If the manufacturer fails to comply with any of the conditions of the Registration Certificate, the licensing authority may after giving him an opportunity to show cause why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing, stating the reasons therefor, suspend or cancel the Registration Certificate for such period as it thinks fit either wholly or in respect of some of the cosmetics to which it relates: Provided that a person who is aggrieved by the order passed by the licensing authority under this rule may, within thirty days of the receipt of the order, appeal to the Central Government and the Central Government may after such enquiry into the matter as it considers necessary and after giving the said appellant an opportunity of being heard pass orders as it thinks fit.

129F. Prohibition of import of certain cosmetic.- No cosmetic, the manufacture, sale or distribution of which is prohibited in the county of origin, shall be imported under the same name or under any other name except for the purpose of examination, test or analysis.

129G. Standard for imported cosmetics.- No cosmetic shall be imported unless it complies with the specifications prescribed under Schedule S and Schedule Q or any other standards of quality and safety, applicable to it, and other provisions under the rules. In case the cosmetic is not included under Schedule S, it shall meet with specifications under the rules and standards applicable to it in the country of origin.

129H. Labeling and Packing of Cosmetics.- No cosmetic shall be imported unless it is packed and labeled in conformity with the rules in Parts XV. Further the label of imported cosmetics shall bear registration certificate number of the product and the name and address of the registration certificate holder for marketing the said product in India.]

130. Documents to be supplied to the Collector of Customs.− Before any cosmetics are imported, a declaration signed by or on behalf of the manufacturer or by on behalf of the importer that the cosmetics comply with the provisions of Chapter III of the Act, and the Rules made there under, shall be supplied to the Collector of Customs.

131. Procedure for the import of cosmetics.− (1) If the officer appointed at the post of entry by the Central Government has reason to believe that any cosmetic contravenes any of the provisions of the Act or the rules made thereunder he may take sample of the cosmetic from the consignment for inspection. If on examination of the sample defects are noticed the officer shall advise the Collector of Customs for further action to be taken.
If the suspected contravention of the provisions of the Act or the Rules is such as may have to be determined by test, the officer shall send the sample to the laboratory established for the purpose for performing such tests. The consignment of the said cosmetic shall be detained till such time that the test report on such sample is received from the Director of the said laboratory or any other officer of the laboratory empowered by him in this behalf with the approval of the Central Government:

Provided that if the importer gives an undertaking in writing not to dispose of the cosmetic without the consent of the Collector of Customs and to return the consignment or such portion thereof as may be required, the Collector of Customs shall make over the consignment to the importer.

(2) If the importer who has given an undertaking under the proviso to sub-rule (1) is required by the Collector of Customs to return the consignment or portion thereof, he shall return the consignment or portion thereof within ten days of receipt of the notice.

Further procedure on receipt of the report of analysis (3) If the Director of the Laboratory established for the purpose by the Central Government or any other officer of the laboratory empowered by him in this behalf with the approval of the Central Government, reports to the Collector of Customs or to the officer mentioned in sub-rule (1) above that the sample of any cosmetic in a consignment contravenes the provisions of Chapter III of the Act or the Rules made thereunder and that the contravention is such that it cannot be remedied by the importer, the Collector of Customs shall communicate the report forthwith to the importer who shall within two months of receiving such a communication either send back all the cosmetic of that description to the country in which it was manufactured or to the country from which it was imported or hand it over to the Central Government which shall cause it to be destroyed:

Provided that the importer may within thirty days of receipt of the report make a representation against the report to the Collector of Customs who shall forward the representation with a fresh sample of the cosmetic to the Drugs Controller, India, who after

obtaining, if necessary, the report of the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory shall pass orders thereon which shall be final.
(4) If the Drugs Controller or any other officer empowered by him in this behalf with the approval of Central Government reports to the Collector of Customs after the inspection of the sample of cosmetic and if necessary, after obtaining a test report thereon that the sample of the said cosmetic contravenes in any respect the provisions of Chapter III of the Act or the Rules made thereunder but that the contravention is such that it can be remedied by the importer, the Collector of Customs shall communicate the report forthwith to the importer and permit him to import the cosmetic on his giving an undertaking in writing not to dispose of the cosmetic without the permission of the officer authorised in this behalf by the Central Government.

132. Exemption of cosmetics—Cosmetics as may be specified in Schedule D shall be exempted from the provisions of Chapter III of the Act and the Rules made thereunder to the extent and subject to the conditions specified in that Schedule.

133. Import through points of entry—No cosmetic shall be imported into India except through the points of entry specified in rule 43A.

1[134. Cosmetic to contain Dyes, Colours and Pigments.- No Cosmetic shall contain Dyes, Colours and Pigments other than those specified by the Bureau of Indian Standards (IS:4707 Part 1 as amended) and Schedule Q.
The permitted Synthetic Organic Colours and Natural Organic Colours used in the Cosmetic shall not contain more than:- (i) 2 parts per million of arsenic calculated as arsenic trioxide.
(ii) 20 parts per million of lead calculated as lead.
(iii) 100 parts per million of heavy metals other than lead calculated as the total of the respective metals.]

2[134-A Prohibition of import of cosmetic containing Hexachlorophene.— No cosmetic containing hexachlorophene shall be imported.

135. Import of cosmetic containing Lead or Arsenic compound prohibited.—No cosmetic shall be imported in which a Lead or Arsenic compound has been used for purposes of colouring.

3[135-A. Import of cosmetics containing mercury compounds prohibited.–No cosmetic shall be imported which contains mercury compounds.]

5[135-B. Prohibition of import of cosmetics tested on animals.–No cosmetic that has been tested on animals after the commencement of the Drugs and Cosmetics (Fifth Amendment) Rules, 2014 shall be imported into the country.]

136. Import of cosmetic for personal use—Small quantities of cosmetics the import of which is otherwise prohibited under section 10 of the Act, may be imported for personal use subject to the following conditions: — (i) The cosmetics shall form part of a passenger‘s baggage and shall be the property of and intended for, the bona fide use of the passenger; and (ii) The cosmetics shall be declared to the Customs authorities, if they so direct.

4[PART XIV MANUFACTURE OF COSMETIC FOR SALE OR FOR DISTRIBUTION]

137. Manufacture on more than one set of premises. — If cosmetics are manufactured on more than one premises, a separate application for each such premises shall be made and a separate licence obtained for each such premises.
1. Subs. by G.S.R. 811 (E), dt. 14-11-1994. 2. Added by G.S.R. 116, dt. 25-1-1975.
3. Ins. by X.11013/76-D & MS, dt. 19-8-1978. 4. Subs. by G.S.R. 788 (E), dt. 10-10-1985.

138. Application for 5 [licence to manufacture cosmetics for sale and distribution]— 3[(1) Application for grant or renewal of 5[licence to manufacture any cosmetic for sale or for distribution] 1[shall be made up to ten items of each category of cosmetics categorized in Schedule MII to the Licensing Authority appointed by the State Government for the purpose of this Part (hereinafter in this Part referred to as the Licensing Authority) in Form 31 and shall be accompanied by a licence fee of rupees two thousand and five hundred and an inspection fee of rupees one thousand for every inspection thereof or for the purpose of renewal of licence].

2[* * * **]

3[(2) If a person applies for the renewal of licence after expiry but within six months of

such expiry, the fee payable for the renewal of such licence shall be 1[rupees two thousand five hundred plus an additional fee at the rate of rupees four hundred per month or part thereof in addition to an inspection fee of rupees one thousand.] 2[* * * * *]

(3) Application by a licensee to manufacture additional items of cosmetics shall be accompanied by a fee of 1[rupees one hundred for each item subject to a maximum of rupees three thousand for each application.] 2[* * * * *]

6[(4) A fee of 1[rupees two hundred and fifty] shall be paid for a duplicate copy of a licence under sub-rule (1), if the original is defaced, damaged or lost.]

4 [138A. Application for loan licence to manufacture cosmetics.−(1) Application for grant or renewal of a loan licence for the manufacture for sale of cosmetics 1[shall be made up to ten items of each category of cosmetics categorized in Schedule M-II in Form 31-A to the Licensing Authority and shall be accompanied by a licence fee of rupees two thousand and five hundred and an inspection fee of rupees one thousand for every inspection thereof].
Explanation.--For the purpose of this rule a ̳loan licence‘ means a licence, which a Licensing Authority may issue to an applicant who does not have his own arrangements to manufacture but who intends to avail himself of the manufacturing facilities owned by a licensee in Form 32.
(2) If a person applies for the renewal of a loan licence after the expiry but within six months of such expiry, the fee payable for the renewal of such a licence shall be

2. Omitted by G.S.R. 331(E),dt. 8.5.1984.
3. Amended by G.S.R. 245, dt. 21.2.1976.
6. Subs. by G.S.R. 331(E),dt. 8.5.1984.

1[rupees two thousand and five hundred plus an additional fee at the rate of rupees four hundred for each month or part thereof.] (3) The Licensing Authority shall before the grant of a loan licence satisfy himself that the manufacturing unit has adequate equipment, staff, capacity for manufacture and facilities to undertake the manufacture on behalf of the applicant for a loan licence.
(4) The loan licence shall be granted by the Licensing Authority to only such applicants who propose to avail of the facilities of manufacture of cosmetics in the premises of a manufacturer located in the same State where the applicant is located. In case the manufacture of cosmetic involves any special process of manufacture or use of equipment which are not available in the State where the applicant is located, the Licensing Authority after consulting the Licensing Authority where the manufacturing unit is located, may grant the loan licence.
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2), application for manufacture of additional items on a loan licence shall be accompanied by a fee of 1[rupees one hundred for each item subject to a maximum of rupees three thousand per application.] (6) A fee of 1[rupees two hundred and fifty] shall be paid for a duplicate copy of

a licence issued under sub-rule (1) if the original is defaced, damaged or lost.

139. Conditions for the grant or renewal of a licence in Form 32—Before a licence in

Form 32 is granted or renewed, the following conditions shall be complied with by applicant:-

(1) The manufacture shall be conducted under the direction and personal supervision of a competent technical staff consisting of at least one person who is a whole time employee and who possesses any one of the following qualifications:

(a) holds a Diploma in Pharmacy approved by the Pharmacy Council of India under the Pharmacy Act, 1948 (8 of 1948), or (b) is registered under the Pharmacy Act, 1948 (8 of 1948), or

(c) has passed the Intermediate Examination with Chemistry as one of the subjects or an examination recognized by the Licensing Authority as equivalent to it.
2[ * * * * *]

2. Omitted by. G.S.R. 331(E), dt. 8.5.1984

1[(2) The factory premises shall comply with the requirements and conditions specified in Schedule M-II.]

2 [ * * * * *]

(5) The applicant shall either--

(i) provide and maintain adequate staff, premises and laboratory equipment for testing the cosmetic manufactured, and the raw materials used in the manufacture; or

(ii) make arrangements with some institution approved by the Licensing Authority 3[under Part XV (A) of these rules] for such tests to be regularly carried out in this behalf by the institution.

4[139A. Form of 5[licence to manufacture cosmetics for sale or for distribution].—A 5[licence to manufacture cosmetics for sale or for distribution] against application in Form 31, shall be granted in Form 32.]

6[139AA. Inspection before grant or renewal of licence.- Before a licence under this Part is granted or renewed in Form 32, Form 32A or Form 33, the Licensing Authority shall cause the establishment, in which the manufacture is proposed to be conducted or being conducted, to be inspected by one or more Inspectors appointed under the Act. The Inspector or Inspectors shall examine all portions of the premises, plant and appliances and also inspect the process of manufacture intended to be employed or being employed along with the means to be employed or being employed for standardizing and testing the substances to be manufactured and enquire into the professional qualifications of the technical staff to be employed. He shall also examine and verify the statements made in the application in regard to their correctness, and the capability of the applicant to comply with the requirements of competent technical staff, manufacturing plant, testing equipments and the requirements of plant and equipments as laid down in Schedule M-II read with requirements of maintenance of records as laid down in Schedule U-1.]

6[139AB. Report by Inspector.- The Inspector or Inspectors shall forward a detailed descriptive report giving his or their findings on each aspect of inspection along with his or their recommendations after completion of his or their inspection to the Licensing Authority.]

6[139AC. Grant or refusal of licence.- (1) If the Licensing Authority after such further enquiry, if any, as he may consider necessary is satisfied that the requirements of the rules under the Act have been complied with and that the conditions of the licence and the rules under the Act shall be observed, he shall grant or renew a licence in form 32, Form 32-A or Form 33.

2. Omitted condition (3) and (4) by G.S.R. 723 (E), dt. 11-8-1992.

(2) If the Licensing Authority is not so satisfied, he shall reject the application and shall inform the applicant of the reasons for such rejection and of the conditions which must be satisfied before a licence can be granted or renewed and shall supply the applicant with a copy of inspection report.]

1[139AD. Further application after rejection.–If within a period of six months from the rejection of an application for a licence, the applicant informs the Licensing Authority that the conditions laid down have been fulfilled and deposits an inspection 2[fee of rupees two hundred and fifty], the Licensing Authority may, if, after causing further inspection to be made, he is satisfied that the conditions for the grant of licence have been complied with, issue a licence in Form 32, Form 32-A or Form 33.]

1[139AE. Appeal to the State Government.- Any person who is aggrieved by the order passed by the Licensing Authority refusing to grant or renew a licence under this Part may, within ninety days from the date of receipt of such order, appeal to the State Government and the State Government may, after such enquiry into the matter as is considered necessary and after giving the said person an opportunity for representing the case, pass such order as it thinks fit.]

3[139B. Form of loan 4[licence to manufacture cosmetics for sale or for distribution].−A loan 4[licence to manufacture cosmetics for sale or for distribution] against application in Form 31-A shall be granted in Form 32-A.

140. Duration of licence.- An original licence or a renewed licence shall unless sooner suspended or cancelled be 2[valid for a period of five years on and from the date on which] it is granted or renewed:

5[Provided that if the application for renewal of a licence in force is made before its expiry or if the application is made within six months of its expiry, after payment of additional fee, the licence shall continue to be in force until orders are passed on the application and the licence shall be deemed to have expired, if application for its renewal is not made within six months of its expiry.]

141. Certificate of renewal.−The certificate of renewal of a licence in Form 32 shall be issued in Form 33.

5. Amended by S.O. 2139, dt. 12.8.1972.

1[141A. Certificate of renewal of a loan licence—The certificate of renewal of a licence in Form 32-A shall be issued in Form 33-A.]

1[141AA. Duration of a loan licence.–An original loan licence in Form 32A or a renewed loan licence in Form 33-A, unless sooner suspended or cancelled, shall be 2[valid for a period of five years on and from the date on which] it is granted or renewed:

Provided that if the application for the renewal of a licence is made before its expiry, or if the application is made within six months of its expiry, after payment of the additional fee, the licence shall continue to be in force until orders are passed on the application. The licence shall be deemed to have expired if the application for its renewal is not made within six months of its expiry.]

142. Conditions of licence—A licence in Form 32 shall be subject to the conditions stated therein and to the following other conditions, namely: –

(a) the licensee shall provide and maintain staff, premises and equipment as specified in rule 139;

(b) the licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Act and the Rules made thereunder and with such further requirements, if any, as may be specified in any rules to be made hereafter under Chapter IV of the Act;
3 [(b1) the licensee shall keep records of the details of each batch of cosmetic manufactured by him and of raw materials used therein as per particulars specified in Schedule U(1) and such records shall be retained for a period of three years;]

(c) the licensee shall test each batch or lot of the raw materials used by him for the cosmetics and also each batch of the final product and shall maintain records or registers showing the particulars in respect of such tests. The records or registers shall be retained for a period of three years from the date of manufacture;
(d) the licensee shall allow any 1 [ Inspector appointed under the Act] to enter with or without prior notice any premises where the manufacture of a substance in respect of which the licence is issued is carried on, to inspect the premises and to take samples of the manufactured products under a receipt;

(e) the licensee shall allow an Inspector to inspect all registers and records maintained under these rules and shall supply to the Inspector such information as he may require for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of the Act and the Rules made thereunder have been complied;

1[(f) the licensee shall maintain an Inspection Book in Form 35 to enable an Inspector to record his impression and the defects noticed:

2[Provided that clauses (b-1) and (c) shall not apply to the manufacture of soap and the procedure for testing of raw materials and the records to be maintained by the manufacturer of soap shall be such as are approved by the Licensing Authority.]

4[142A. Additional information to be furnished by an applicant for licence or a licensee to the Licensing Authority.—The applicant for the grant of a licence or any person granted a licence under this Part shall, on demand, furnish to the Licensing Authority, before the grant of the licence or during the period the licence is in force, as the case may be, documentary evidence in respect of the ownership or occupation on rental or other basis of the premises, specified in the application for licence or in the licence granted, constitution of the firm, or any other relevant matter, which may be required for the purpose of verifying the correctness of the statements made by the applicant or the licensee, while applying for or after obtaining the licence as the case may be.]

1[142B. Conditions of licence in Form 32-A.–

(a) A licence in Form 32-A shall be deemed to be cancelled or suspended, if the licence owned by the licensee, in Form 32, whose manufacturing facilities are cancelled or suspended, as the case may be under these rules.

(b) The licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Act and these rules and with each further requirements, if any, as may be specified from time to time in Chapter IV of the Act, provided that where such further requirements are specified in the rules, these would come into force four months after publication in the Official Gazette.

3[(b1) The licensee shall keep records of the details of each batch of cosmetic manufactured by him and of raw materials used therein as per particulars specified in Schedule U(1) and such records shall be retained for a period of three years.]

(c) The licensee shall test each batch or lot of the raw materials used by him for the manufacture of the cosmetics and also each batch of the final product and shall maintain records of registration showing the particulars in respect of such tests. The records or registers shall be retained for a period of three years from the date of manufacture.

4. Ins. by S.O.2139, dt. 12-8-1972.

(d) The licensee shall allow an Inspector appointed under the Act to enter with or without prior notice any premises where the manufacture of a substance in respect of which licence is issued is carried on, to inspect the premises and to take samples of the manufactured products under a receipt.

(e) The licensee shall allow an Inspector to inspect all registers and records maintained under these rules and shall supply to the Inspector such information as he may require for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of the Act, and the rules made thereunder have been complied.

(f) The licensee shall maintain an Inspection Book in Form 35 to enable an Inspector to record his impressions and the defects noticed.]

143. Cancellation and suspension of licence.−(1) The Licensing Authority may, after giving the licensee an opportunity to show cause why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing stating the reasons therefor, cancel a licence issued under this Part or suspend it for such period as he thinks fit, either wholly or in respect of some of the substances to which it relates, if in his opinion, the licensee has failed to comply with any of the conditions of the licence or with any provisions of the Act or the rules made thereunder.

(2) A licensee whose license has been suspended or cancelled may appeal within a period of three months from the date of the order to the State Government which shall after considering the appeal, pass orders, and such orders shall be final.

1[144. Prohibition of manufacture of cosmetics containing colours other than those prescribed.- No Cosmetic shall be manufactured which contains Dyes, Colours and Pigments other than the one specified by the Bureau of Indian Standards (IS: 4707 Part I as amended) and Schedule Q.

The permitted Synthetic Organic colours and Natural Organic colours used in the Cosmetic shall not contain more than−

(i) 2 parts per million of arsenic calculated as arsenic trioxide.
(ii) 20 parts per million of lead calculated as lead.
(iii) 100 parts per million of heavy metals other than lead calculated as the total of the respective metals.]

2[144A. Prohibition of manufacture of cosmetics containing Hexachlorophene.—No cosmetic containing Hexachlorophene shall be manufactured:]

2. Ins. by G.S.R. 116, dt. 15.1.1975.

1[Provided that in the case of soaps Hexachlorophene may be used in concentrations not exceeding one per cent weight by weight:

Provided further that the following cautionary note shall be printed and shall appear in a conspicuous manner on the wrapper of package of each soap, namely:-

―Contains Hexachlorophene – not to be used on babies‖.]

145. Use of Lead and Arsenic compounds for the purpose of colouring cosmetics prohibited.—The use of Lead and Arsenic compounds for the purpose of colouring cosmetics is prohibited.

2[145A. Form of intimation for purpose of taking samples of cosmetics.—Where an Inspector takes a sample of a cosmetic for the purpose of test or analysis, he shall intimate such purpose in writing in Form 17 to the person from whom he takes it.]

3[145AA. Form of receipt of samples of cosmetics where fair price tendered is refused.- Where the fair price, for the samples of Cosmetics taken for the purpose of test or analysis, tendered under sub-section (1) of section 23 has been refused, the Inspector shall tender a receipt therefor to the person from whom the said samples have been taken as specified in Form 17A.]

2[145B. Form of receipt for seized cosmetics.−A receipt by an Inspector for the stock of any cosmetic seized under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 22 of the Act shall be in Form 15.]

4[145BA. Manner of certifying copies of seized documents.-The Drugs Inspector shall return the documents, seized by him under clause (cc), or produced before him under clause (cca), of sub-section (1) of section 22 of the Act, within a period of twenty days of the date of such seizure or production, to the person from whom they were seized or, as the case may be, the person who produced them, after copies thereof or extracts therefrom have been signed by the Drugs Inspector concerned and the person from whom they were seized, or, as the case may be, who produced such records.]

5[145C. Form of order not to dispose of stocks of cosmetics—An order in writing by an Inspector under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 22 of the Act requiring a person not to dispose of any stock of cosmetics in his possession shall be in Form 15.]

6[145D. Prohibition of manufacture of cosmetics containing mercury compounds.– No cosmetics containing mercury compounds shall be manufactured.]

2. Ins. by S.O. 2139, dt. 5.6.1972.
6. Ins. by G.S.R. 1074, dt. 19.8.1978 (w.e.f. 2.9.1978).

PART XV 1[LABELLING, PACKING AND STANDARDS OF COSMETICS]

146. Prohibition of sale or distribution.–Subject to other provisions of these rules, no person shall sell or distribute any cosmetic unless the cosmetic, if of Indian origin is manufactured by a licensed manufacturer and labelled and packed in accordance with these rules.

2[147. Exemption of cosmetics not manufactured for consumption or sale in India from the provisions of this Part.– Labels on packages or containers of cosmetics not manufactured for consumption or sale in India shall be adopted to meet the specific requirements, if any, of the consignee:

Provided that where a cosmetic is required by the consignee to be not labelled with the name and address of the manufacturer, the labels on packages or containers shall bear a code number as approved by the Licensing Authority mentioned in rule 21.]

148. Manner of labelling.–Subject to other provisions of the rules, a cosmetic shall carry.–

(1) on both the inner and outer labels;
(a) the name of the cosmetic,

3[(b) the name of the manufacturer and complete address of the premises of the manufacturer where the cosmetic has been manufactured.

Provided that if the cosmetic is contained in a very small size container where the address of the manufacturer cannot be given, the name of the manufacturer and his principal place of manufacture shall be given along with pin code.]

(2) On the outer label.–

A declaration of the net contents expressed in terms of weight for solids, fluid measure for liquids, weight for semi-solids, combined with numerical count if the content is sub-divided:

Provided that this statement need not appear in case of a package of perfume, toilet water or the like the net content of which does not exceed 60 ml or any package of solid or semisolid cosmetic the net content of which does not exceed 30 grams.

(3) On the inner label, where a hazard exists– (a) adequate direction for safe use, (b) any warning, caution or special direction required to be observed by the consumer, (c) a statement of the names and quantities of the ingredients that are hazardous or poisonous.

1. Subs. by S.O. 3408, dt. 1.11.1996.

1[(4) A distinctive batch number, that is to say, the number by reference to which details of manufacture of the particular batch from which the substance in the container is taken are recorded and are available for inspection, the figures representing the batch number being preceded by the letter ―B‖:
Provided that this clause shall not apply to any cosmetic containing 10 grams or less if the cosmetic is in solid or semi-solid state, and 25 millilitres or less if the cosmetic is in a liquid state:

2[Provided further that in the case of soaps, instead of the batch number, the month and year of manufacture of soap shall be given on the label.]

1[(5) manufacturing licence number, the number being preceded by the letter ̳M‘.]

(6) Where a package of a cosmetic has only one label, such label shall contain all the information required to be shown on both the inner and the outer labels, under these Rules.

5[(7) The list of ingredients, present in concentration of more than one percent shall be listed in the descending order of weight or volume at the time they are added, followed by those inconcentration of less than or equal to one percent, in any order, and preceded by the words ̳INGREDIENTS‘.
Provided that this statement need not appear for packs of less than 60 ml of liquid and30 gm of solid and semi-solids.

(8) Labeling requirement, if any, specified in the relevant Indian standard as laid down by the ̳Bureau of Indian Standards‘ for the cosmetics covered under Schedule S.]

3[148A. Prohibition against altering inscriptions on containers, labels or wrappers of cosmetics.- No person shall alter, obliterate or deface any inscription or mark made or recorded by the manufacturer on the container, label or wrapper of any cosmetic:
Provided that nothing in this rule shall apply to any alteration, inscription or mark made on the container, label or wrapper of any cosmetic at the instance or direction or with the permission of the licensing authority.]

5[148B - Prohibition against false or misleading claims :- No cosmetic may purport or claimto purport or convey any idea which is false or misleading to the intending user.]

149. 4[Labelling of Hair dyes containing Dyes, Colours and Pigments.—Hair dyes containing Para-Phenylenediamine or other Dyes, Colours and Pigments] shall be labelled with the following legend in English and local languages and these shall appear on both the inner and the outer labels.
―Caution—This product contains ingredients which may cause skin irritation in certain cases and so a preliminary test according to the accompanying direction should first be made. This product should not be used for dyeing the eye-lashes or eye-brows;
as such a use may cause blindness‖.
Each package shall also contain instructions in English and local languages on the following lines for carrying out the test:
―This preparation may cause serious inflammation of the skin in some cases and so a preliminary test should always be carried out to determine whether or not special sensitivity exists. To make the test, cleanse a small area of skin behind the ear or upon the inner surface of the forearm, using either soap and water or alcohol. Apply a small quantity of the hair dye as prepared for use to the area and allow it to dry.
After twenty-four hours, wash the area gently with soap and water. If

no irritation or inflammation is apparent, it may be assumed that

2. Ins. by. 681(E), dt. 6-8-1988.
5. Ins. by. 46 (E), dt. 22-1-2009.

no hypersensitivity to the dye exists. The test should, however, be carried out before each and every application. This preparation should on no account be used for dyeing eyebrows or eye-lashes as severe inflammation of the eye or even blindness may result.] 1[149A. Special provisions relating to toothpaste containing fluoride.-

(i) Fluoride content in tooth paste shall not be more than 1000 ppm and the content of fluoride in terms of ppm shall be mentioned on the tube and carton.

(ii) Date of expiry should be mentioned on tube and carton.]

150. Report of result of test or analysis of cosmetics.—Test reports on samples of cosmetics taken for test or analysis under these rules shall be supplied in Form 34.
2[150-A. Standard for cosmetics.- Subject to the provisions of these rules, the standards for cosmetics shall be such as may be prescribed in Schedule S.]

3 [PART XV (A) APPROVAL OF INSTITUTIONS FOR CARRYING OUT TESTS ON DRUGS, COSMETICS AND RAW MATERIALS USED IN THEIR MANUFACTURE ON BEHALF OF LICENSEES FOR MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OF DRUGS / COSMETICS

150-B. Application for grant of testing drugs/cosmetics— (1) Application for grant or renewal of approval for carrying out tests for identity, purity, quality and strength on drugs or cosmetics or the raw materials used in the manufacture thereof on behalf of licensees for manufacture for sale of drugs or cosmetics, shall be made in Form 36 to the Licensing Authority appointed by the State Government for the purposes of Part VII, VII (A) or XIV of these Rules, as the case may be and referred to as the ―approving authority‖ under this Part and shall be accompanied by an inspection fee of 2[rupees six thousand] in the case of testing of drugs specified in Schedules C and C (1) and 2[rupees one thousand five hundred] in the case of testing of drugs other than those specified in Schedules C and C (1), homoeopathic drugs and cosmetics:

Provided that the applicant shall furnish to the approving authority such additional information as may be required by him in connection with the application in Form 36:

4[Provided further that if the applicant applies for renewal of approval after its expiry but within six months of such expiry, the inspection fee payable shall be rupees six thousand in the case of testing of drugs specified in Schedules C and C (1) and rupees one thousand five hundred in the case of testing of drugs other than those specified in Schedules C and C (1), Homoeopathic medicines and cosmetics plus an additional fee at the rate of rupees one thousand per month.]

4[(2) A separate application shall be made for grant of approval for carrying out tests on additional categories of drugs or items of cosmetics and shall be accompanied by an inspection fee of rupees one thousand five hundred in the case of drugs specified in Schedule C and Schedule C(1) and rupees one thousand each in case of drugs other than those specified in Schedule C and Schedule C(1), homeopathic medicines and cosmetics.

3. Ins. rule 150B to 150K by X.1104/7/76-D&M, dt. 23-8-1977.

Explanation—For the purpose of this Part, the words ̳drugs‘ and ̳cosmetics‘ shall also mean and include the raw materials used in the manufacture of drugs including Homoeopathic drugs or cosmetics, as the case may be.]

150-C. Form in which approval to be granted for carrying out tests on drugs / cosmetics on behalf of licensees for manufacture of drugs/cosmetics and conditions for grant or renewal of such approval.– (1) Approval for carrying out such tests of identity, purity, quality and strength of drugs or cosmetics as may be required under the provisions of these rules, on behalf of licensee for manufacture of drugs or cosmetics shall be granted in Form 37.

(2) Before approval in Form 37 is granted or renewed, the following conditions shall be complied with by the applicant–

(1) The premises where the tests are being carried out shall be well lighted and properly ventilated except where the nature of tests of any drug or cosmetic warrants otherwise. Wherever necessary, the premises shall be air conditioned so as to maintain the accuracy and functioning of laboratory instruments or to enable the performance of special tests such as sterility tests, microbiological tests, etc.

(2) The applicant shall provide adequate space having regard to the nature and number of samples of drugs or cosmetics proposed to be tested.

Provided that the approving authority shall determine from time to time whether the space provided continues to be adequate.

(3) If it is intended to carry out tests requiring the use of animals, the applicant shall provide for an animal house and comply with the following requirements–

(a) The animal house shall be adequate in area, well lighted and properly ventilated and the animals undergoing tests shall be kept in air conditioned area.

(b) The animals shall be suitably housed in hygienic surroundings and necessary provisions made for removal of excreta and foul smell.

(c) The applicant shall provide for suitable arrangements for preparation of animal feed.

(d) The applicant shall provide for suitable arrangements for quarantining of all animals immediately on their receipt in the institution.

(e) The animals shall be periodically examined for their physical fitness.

(f) The applicant shall provide for isolation of sick animals as well as animals under test.

(g) The applicant shall ensure compliance with the requirements of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 (59 of 1960).

(h) The applicant shall make proper arrangements for the disposal of the carcasses of animals in a manner as not to cause hazard to public health.

(4) The applicant shall provide and maintain suitable equipment having regard to the nature and number of samples of drugs or cosmetics intended to be tested which shall be adequate in the opinion of the approving authority.

(5) The testing of drugs or cosmetics, as the case may be, shall be under the active direction of a person whose qualifications and experience are considered adequate in the opinion of the approving authority and who shall be held responsible for the reports of test or analysis issued by the applicant.

(6) The testing of drugs or cosmetics, as the case may be, for identity, purity, quality and strength shall be carried out by persons whose qualifications and experience of testing are adequate in the opinion of the approving authority.

(7) The applicant shall provide books of standards recognized under the provisions of the Act and the Rules made thereunder and such books of reference as may be required in connection with the testing or analysis of the products for the testing of which approval is applied for.

150D. Duration of approval. –An approval granted in Form 37 or renewed in Form 38, unless sooner suspended or withdrawn, shall be 1[valid for a period of five years on and from the date on which] it is granted or renewed:

Provided that if an application for the renewal of an approval in Form 37 is made before its expiry or if the application is made within six months of its expiry after the payment of the additional fee, the approval shall continue to be in force until orders are passed on the applications and the approval shall be deemed to have expired if the application for its renewal is not made within six months of its expiry.

150E. Conditions of approval –An approval in Form 37 shall be subject to the following general conditions: —

(a) The institution granted approval under this Part (hereinafter referred to as the approved institution) shall provide and maintain an adequate staff and adequate premises and equipment as specified in rule 150-C 2[and Schedule L-1].

(b) The approved institution shall provide proper facilities for storage so as to preserve the properties of the samples to be tested by it.

(c) The approved institution shall maintain records of tests for identity, purity, quality and strength carried out on all samples of drugs or cosmetics and the results thereof together with the protocols of tests showing the readings and calculation in such form as to be available for inspection and such records shall be retained in the case of substances for which an expiry date is assigned for a period of two years from the expiry of such date and in the case of other substances for a period of six years.

(d) The approved institution shall allow the Inspector appointed under this Act to enter with or without prior notice the premises where the testing is carried on and to inspect the premises and the equipment used for test and the testing procedures employed.
The institution shall allow the Inspectors to inspect the registers and records maintained under these Rules and shall supply to such Inspectors such information as they may require for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of the Act and Rules made thereunder have been observed.

(e) The approved institution shall from time to time report to the approving authority any changes in the person-in-charge of testing of drugs or cosmetics or in the expert staff responsible for testing as the case may be and any material alteration in the premises or changes in the equipment used for the purposes of testing which have been made since the date of last inspection made on behalf of the approving authority before the grant or renewal of approval.

(f) The approved institution shall furnish reports of the results of test or analysis in Form 39.

(g) In case any sample of a drug or a cosmetic is found on test to be not of standard quality, the approved institution shall furnish the approving authority 1[and the licensing authority of the State where the manufacturer and/or sender of the drug or cosmetic is located] with copy of the test report on the sample with the protocols of tests applied.

(h) The approved institution shall comply with the provisions of the Act and Rules made thereunder and with each further requirements, if any, may be specified in the rules subsequently made under Chapter IV of the Act of which the approving authority has given the approved institution not less than four months notice.

(i) The approved institution shall maintain an Inspection Book to enable the Inspectors to record his impression or defects noticed.

150F. Inspection before grant of approval.— Before an approval in Form 37 is granted, the approving authority shall cause the institution at which the testing of drugs or cosmetics, as the case may be, is proposed to be carried out to be inspected jointly by the Drugs Inspectors of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation and the State Drugs Control Organisation who shall examine the premises and the equipment intended to be used for testing of drugs or cosmetics and inquire into the professional qualifications of the expert staff to be employed.

150G. Report of Inspection.— The Drug Inspector mentioned in rule 150-F shall forward to the approving authority a detailed report of the result of the inspection.

150H. Procedure of approving authority.— (1) If the approving authority after such further enquiry, if any, as he may consider necessary, is satisfied that the requirements of the rules made under the Act have been complied with and that the conditions of the approval and the rules made under the Act will be observed, he shall grant an approval in Form 37.

(2) If the approving authority is not so satisfied, he shall reject the application and shall inform the applicant of the reasons for such rejection and of the conditions which must be satisfied before an approval could be granted.

150-I. Further application after rejection.— If within a period of six months from the rejection of an application for approval, the applicant informs the approving authority that the conditions laid down have been satisfied and deposits inspection fee of 2[rupees two hundred and fifty], the approving authority may, if, after causing a further inspection to be made, he is satisfied that the conditions for grant of approval have been complied with, grant the approval in Form 37.

2. Subs.by G.S.R 601 (E), dt. 24-8-2001.

150J. Renewal. – On an application being made for renewal the approving authority may cause an inspection to be made and if satisfied that the conditions of the approval and the rules made under the Act are and shall continue to be observed shall issue a certificate of renewal in Form 38.

150K. Withdrawal and suspension of approvals – (1) The approving authority may, after giving the approved institution an opportunity to show cause why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing stating the reasons therefor, withdraw an approval granted under this Part or suspend it for such period as he thinks fit either wholly or in respect of some of the categories of drugs or items of cosmetics to which it relates, if in his opinion the approved institution has failed to comply with any of the conditions of the approval or with any provisions of the Act or the Rules made thereunder.

(2) Any approved institution whose approval has been suspended or withdrawn may within three months of the date of the order, appeal to the State Government which shall dispose of the appeal in consultation with a panel of competent persons appointed by it in this behalf and notified in the Official Gazette.]

1[PART XVI

MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OF AYURVEDIC (INCLUDING SIDDHA) OR
UNANI DRUGS

151. Manufacture on more than one set of premises.—If Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs are manufactured on more than one set of premises, a separate application shall be made and a separate licence shall be obtained in respect of each such set of premises.

152. Licensing Authorities.—For the purpose of this Part the State Government shall appoint such Licensing Authorities and for such areas as may be specified in this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette.

153. Application for licence to manufacture Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs.— (1) An application for the grant or renewal of a licence to manufacture for sale any Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs shall be made in Form 24-D to the Licensing Authority along with 2[a fee of rupees one thousand]:

Provided that in the case of renewal the applicant may apply for the renewal of the licence before its expiry or within one month of such expiry:

Provided further that the applicant may apply for renewal after the expiry of one month but within three months of such expiry in which case the 2[fee payable for renewal of such licence shall be rupees one thousand and two hundred plus an additional fee of rupees six hundred].

(ii) 2[A fee of rupees three hundred] shall be payable for a duplicate copy of a licence issued under this rule, if the original licence is defaced, damaged or lost.

1. Parts XVI, XVII and XVII added by S.O. 642, dt. the 2-2-1970 (w.e.f. 21.2.1970)

1 [153A. Loan Licence.—(i) An application for the grant of renewal of a loan licence to manufacture for sale of any Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs shall be made in Form 25-E to the Licensing Authority along with 2[a fee of rupees six hundred.]

Explanation—For the purpose of this rule, a loan licence means a licence which a Licensing Authority may issue to an applicant who does not have his own arrangements for manufacture but intends to avail himself of the manufacturing facilities owned by a licence in Form 25-D:

Provided that in the case of renewal the applicant may apply for the renewal of the licence before its expiry or within one month of such expiry:

Provided further that the applicant may apply for renewal after the expiry of one month, but within three months of such expiry in which case 2[the fee payable for renewal of such licences shall be rupees six hundred plus an additional fee of rupees three hundred.]]

(ii) 2[A fee of rupees one hundred and fifty] shall be payable for a duplicate copy of a licence issued under this rule, if the original licence is defaced, damaged or lost.]

154. Form of licence to manufacture Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs.
— (1) Subject to the conditions of rule 157 being fulfilled, a licence to manufacture for sale any Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs shall be issued in Form 25-D. The licence shall be issued within a period of three months from the date of receipt of the application.

(2) A licence under this rule shall be granted by the licensing authority after consulting such expert in Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani Systems of medicine as the case may be, which the State Government may approve in this behalf.

1[154A. Form of loan licence to manufacture for sale of Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs.—

(1) A loan licence to manufacture for sale of any Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs shall be issued in Form 25E.

(2) A licence under this rule shall be granted by the Licensing Authority after consulting such expert in Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani systems of medicine, as the case may be, which the State Government may approve in this behalf.

(3) The Licensing Authority shall, before the grant of a loan licence, satisfy himself that the manufacturing unit has adequate equipment, staff, capacity for manufacture and facilities for testing, to undertake the manufacture on behalf of the applicant for a loan licence.]

155. Certificate of renewal—The certificate of renewal of a licence in Form 25-D shall be issued in Form 26-D.

1 [155A. Certificate of renewal of a loan licence.—The certificate of renewal of a loan licence in Form 25-E shall be issued in Form 26-E.]

2[155B. Certificate of award of G.M.P. of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Drugs.— 3[(1)]The certificate of Good Manufacturing Practices to manufacturers of Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani drugs shall be issued to licensees who comply with the requirements of Good Manufacturing Practice of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs as laid down in Schedule T.] 4[(2) The certificate referred to in sub-rule (1) shall be issued for a period of five years from the date of issuance of the license.]

156. Duration of licence—An original licence in Form 25-D or a renewed licence in Form 26-D, unless sooner suspended or cancelled shall be 5[valid for a period of 6[five years] from the date of its issue]:
Provided that if the application for the renewal of a licence is made before its expiry or within one month of its expiry after payment of the additional fee of rupees thirty, the licence shall continue to be in force until orders are passed on the application. The licence shall be deemed to have expired, if the application for its renewal is not made within three months of its expiry.]

1 [156A. Duration of loan licence.—An original loan licence in Form 25-E or a renewed loan licence in Form 26-E, unless sooner suspended or cancelled, shall be valid up to the 31st December of the year following the year in which it is granted or renewed:
Provided that if the application for the renewal of a loan licence is made in accordance with rule 153-A, the loan licence shall continue to be in force until orders are passed on the application. The licence shall be deemed to have expired, if the application for its renewal is not made within three months of its expiry.]

157. Conditions for the grant or renewal of a licence in Form 25-D.—Before a licence in Form 25-D is granted or renewed in Form 26-D the following conditions shall be complied with by the applicant, namely: — (1) The manufacture of Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs shall be carried out in such premises and under such hygienic conditions as are specified in Schedule T.
2[(IA) For issuing of the certificate of Good Manufacturing Practices, the Licensing Authority shall verify the requirements as per schedule T and issue the Good Manufacturing Practices certificate in form 26 E-I, simultaneously along with grant or renewal of licence in form 25D].
7[(IB) No manufacturer shall use any prefix or suffix with the name of any Ayurvedic, Siddha or UnaniTibb drug falling under clause (a) of section 3 of the Act, except as described in the authoritative books specified in the First Schedule to the Act:
Provided that a formulation without any specific name, described in the authoritative books may be named on the basis of the ingredients of the formulation.
(IC) The name of any Ayurvedic, Siddha or UnaniTibb drug falling under clause (a) of section 3 of the Act shall not be used for naming any patent or proprietary medicine relating to Ayurvedic, Siddha or UnaniTibb systems of medicine referred to in sub-clause (i) of clause (h) of the said section:
Provided that this rule shall not be applicable for single plant-ingredient based Ayurvedic, Siddha or UnaniTibb formulation licensed or to be licensed as patent or proprietary medicine under sub-clause (i) of clause (h) of section 3 of the Act.]

1. Ins. by G.S.R. 376 (E),dt. 20-7-1978. 7. Ins. by G.S.R. 390 (E),dt. 18.5.2015.
2. Subs. by G.S.R. 376 (E),dt. 3-5-2010. Earlier Ins. by G.S.R. 198 (E), dt. 7-3-2003.
3. Rule 155B renumbered as sub-rule (1) by G.S.R. 376 (E),dt. 3-5-2010.
4. Ins. by G.S.R. 376 (E),dt. 3-5-2010.
6. Subs. by G.S.R. 376 (E),dt. 3-5-2010.

(ID) Notwithstanding the period for renewal of licence provided in rules 156 and 156 A, the licensee of the Ayurvedic, Siddha or UnaniTibb drug, which is not in conformity with sub-rules (1B) and (1C), shall seek renewal of the licence with appropriate name of the drug within a period of one year from the date of commencement of Drugs and Cosmetics (4th Amendment) Rules, 2015:
Provided that this rule shall not be applicable to any batch of Ayurvedic, Siddha or UnaniTibb drugs manufactured prior to the date of commencement of the Drugs and Cosmetics (4th Amendment) Rules, 2015.

(IE) Whoever contravenes the provisions of rules (IB) to (ID) shall be punishable under section 33-I of the Act.]

(2) The manufacture of Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs shall be conducted under the direction and supervision of competent technical staff consisting at least of one person, who is a whole time employee and who possesses the following qualifications, namely:– (a) A degree in Ayurveda or Ayurvedic Pharmacy, Siddha or Unani system of medicine, as the case may be, conferred by a University, a State Government or Statutory Faculties, Councils and Boards of Indian Systems of Medicines recognized by the Central Government or a State Government for this purpose, or

(b) a diploma in Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani system of medicine granted by a State Government for this purpose, or

(c) a graduate in Pharmacy or Pharmaceutical Chemistry or Chemistry or Botany of a University recognized by the Central Government with experience of at least two years in the manufacture of drugs pertaining to the Ayurvedic or Siddha or Unani systems of medicines, or

(d) a Vaid or Hakim registered in a State Register of Practitioners of indigenous systems of medicines having experience of at least four years in the manufacture of Ayurvedic or Siddha or Unani drugs, or

(e) a qualification as Pharmacist in Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani systems of medicines, possessing experience of not less than eight years in the manufacture of Ayurvedic or Siddha or Unani drugs as may be recognized by the Central Government.

(3) The competent technical staff to direct and supervise the manufacture of Ayurvedic drugs shall have qualifications in Ayurveda and the competent technical staff to direct and supervise the manufacture of Siddha drugs and Unani drugs shall have qualification in Siddha or Unani, as the case may be.

3[157A. Maintaining of records of raw material used by licensed manufacturing unit of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs in the preceding financial year.- Each licensed manufacturing unit of Ayurveda or Siddha or Unani drugs shall keep a record of raw material used by each licensed manufacturing unit of Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani drugs as the case may be in the proforma given in Schedule TA in respect of all raw materials utilized by that unit in the manufacture of Ayurveda or Siddha or Unani drugs in the preceding financial year, and shall submit the same by the 30th day of June of the succeeding financial year to the State Drug Licensing Authority of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs and to the National Medicinal Plants Board or any agency nominated by the National Medicinal Plant Board for this purpose.]

158. Conditions of licence.—A licence in Form 25D shall be subject to the conditions stated therein and to the following further conditions, namely:–

(a) The licensee shall maintain proper records of the details of manufacture and of the tests, if any, carried out by him, or by any other person on his behalf, of the raw materials and finished products.

(b) The licensee shall allow an Inspector appointed under the Act to enter any premises where the manufacture of a substance in respect of which the licence is issued is carried on, to inspect the premises, to take samples of the raw material as well as finished the products, and to inspect the records maintained under these rules.

1[(c) The licensee shall maintain an Inspection Book in Form 35 to enable an Inspector to record his impressions and the defects noticed.]

2[158-A. Condition of loan licence.—A licence in Form 25E shall be subject to the conditions stated therein and to the following conditions, namely:—

(a) The licence in Form 25E shall be deemed to be cancelled or suspended, if the licence owned by the licensee in Form 25D whose manufacturing facilities have been availed of by the licensee is cancelled or suspended, as the case may be, under these rules.

(b) The licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Act and of the rules and with such further requirements, if any, as may be specified in any rules subsequently made under Chapter IV-A of the Act, provided that where such further requirements are specified in the rules; these would come into force four months after publication in the Official Gazette.

(c) The licensee shall maintain proper records of the details of manufacture and of the tests, if any, carried out by him, or any other person on his behalf, of the raw materials and finished products.

(d) The licensee shall allow an Inspector appointed under the Act to inspect all registers and records maintained under these rules and shall supply to the Inspector such information as he may require for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of the Act and the rules have been observed.

1[(e) The licensee shall maintain an Inspection Book in form 35 to enable an Inspector to record his impressions and the defects noticed.]

1[158(B) Guidelines for issue of license with respect to Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani drugs.- I. (A). Ayurveda, Siddha Unani Medicines under section 3(a):- Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani drugs includes all medicines intended for internal or external use for or in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of disease or disorder in human beings or animals, and manufactured exclusively in accordance with the formulae described in the authoritative books of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Tibb system of medicine, as specified in the First Schedule;
(B). Patent or Proprietary medicine under section 3(h);
(i) In relation to Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Tibb system of medicine of all formulations containing only such ingredients mentioned in the formulae described in the authoritative books of Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani Tibb system of medicines specified in the First Schedule, but does not include a medicine which is administered by parenteral route and also a formulation included in the authoritative books as specified in clause (a);
(ii) Balya/Poshak/Muqawi/Unavuporutkal/positive health Promoter formulations having ingredients mentioned in books of First Schedule of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and recommended for promotional and preventive health.
(iii) Saundarya Prasadak (Husane afza)/Azhagh-sadhan formulation having ingredients mentionedin Books of First Schedule of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and recommended for oral, skin, hair and body care.
(iv) Aushadh Ghana (Medicinal plant extracts - dry/wet) extract obtained from plant mentioned in books of First Schedule of the Act including Aqueous or hydro-alcohol.

II.(A) For issue of licence to the medicine with respect to Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani, the conditions relating to safety study and the experience or evidence of effectiveness shall be such as specified in columns (5) and (6) of The Table given below:-

Serial number Category Ingredient (S) Indication (s) Safety study Experience/Evidence of Effectiveness

Published Literature Proof of Effectiveness

(A) Ayurveda, siddha and Unani drugs, given in 158 B as referred in 3(a) As per text As per text Not Required Required Not Required

(B) Any change in dosage form of Ayurveda, siddha and Unani drugs, as described in section 3 (a) of the Drugs and Cosmetics As per text As per text Not Required Required Not Required

Act, 1940

(C) Ayurveda, siddha and Unani drugs, referred in 3(a) to be used for new indication As per text New Not Required If Required Required

II.B For issue of license with respect to Patent or Proprietary medicine. The condition relating to Safety studies and experience or evidence of effectiveness shall be specified as follows:-

Serial number Category Ingredient (S) Indication (s) Safety study Experience/Evidence of Effectiveness

Published Literature Proof of Effectiveness

Patent orPropri etary medicine As per text Textual Rationale Not Required Of Ingredients Pilot study as per relevant protocol for Ayurveda, siddha and Unani drugs

Ayurveda, siddha and Unani drugswith any of the ingredients of Schedule E(1) of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 As per text Existing Required Required Required

III. For issue of license with respect to Balya and Poshak medicines the person who applied for license is required to submit the following:
(i) Photo-copy of the textual reference of ingredients used in the formulation as mentioned in the book of 1st schedule;
(ii) Conduct safety studies in case the product contains of any of the ingredients as specified in the Schedule E (1), as per the guidelines for evaluation of Ayurveda Siddha and Unani Drugs formulations;
(iii) For textual indications the safety and effectiveness study is not required.
IV. For issue of license with respect to Saundarya Prasadak (Husane afza/Azhagu Sodhan) the person who applied for license is required to:- (i) Submit photo-copy of the textual reference of ingredients used in the formulation as mentioned in the book of 1st schedule;

(ii) Conduct safety studies, in case the formulation contains of any of the ingredients as specified in the Schedule E (1), as per the guidelines for evaluation of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani formulation;

(iii) For textual indications the safety and effectiveness study is not required.
V. For issue of license with respect to medicine Aushadh Ghana extract of medicinal plant (dry or wet).
Serial number Category Ingredien t (S) Indication (s) Safety study Experience/Evidence of Effectiveness

Published Literature Proof of Effectiveness

(A) Aqueous As per text As per text Not Required Not Required Not Required

(Al).
Aqueous As per text New Indication** Not Required Not Required Required

(B) HydroAlcohol As per text As per text Not Required If Required Not Required

(B1) HydroAlcohol As specified New Indication** Required If Required Required

Other than Hydro/ HydroAlc ohol As specified As specified Required Acute, Chronic, mutagenicity and teratogenicit y If Required Required

* The standard protocol will also include concept of Anupan, Prakriti & Tridosh etc.
published by Central Research Councils Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and other Government/Research Bodies.
** New indication means which is other than mentioned in 1st schedule books of Drugs & Cosmetics Act 1940.]

1[158C. Form of Free Sale Certificate and Non-Conviction Certificate. – The State Drug Controller or Licensing Authority shall, on request by the Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Drugs manufacturer, issue, within 15 days; from the date of application, Free Sale Certificate in Form 26 E2-I for original License holder or in Form 26 E2-II for loan license and Non Conviction Certifacate for both original and loan license holder in Form 26 E3 or in the format as specified by the importing country or tenderer respectively, after fulfilment of all requisite formalities as required in the respective formats.]

159. Cancellation and suspension of licences— (1) The Licensing Authority may, after giving an opportunity to show cause within a period which shall not be less than fifteen days from the date of receipt of such notice, why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing stating the reasons therefor, cancel a licence issued under this Part or suspend it for such period as he thinks fit, either wholly or in respect of some of the drugs to which it relates, if in his opinion, the licensee has failed to comply with any of the conditions of the licence or with any provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder.

(2) A licensee whose licence has been suspended or cancelled may appeal to the State Government within a period of three months from the date of receipt of the order which shall, after considering the appeal, decide the same.

160. Identification of raw materials.— Raw materials used in the preparation of Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs shall be identified and tested, wherever tests are available for their genuineness, and records of such tests as are carried out for the purpose and the methods thereof shall be maintained.

1[PART XVI (A)

APPROVAL OF INSTITUTIONS FOR CARRYING OUT TESTS ON AYURVEDIC,
SIDDHA AND UNANI DRUGS AND RAW MATERIALS USED IN THEIR MANUFACTURE ON BEHALF OF LICENSEES FOR MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OF AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA AND UNANI DRUGS

160-A. Application for grant of approval for testing Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs.- Application for grant or renewal of approval for carrying out tests for identity, purity, quality and strength of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs or the raw materials used in the manufacture thereof on behalf of licensees for manufacture for sale of the said Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs, shall be made in Form 47 to the Licensing Authority appointed by the State Government for the purposes of Part XVI, XVII or XVIII of these rules, as the case may be, and referred to as the ̳approving authority‘ under this Part and shall be accompanied by an inspection fee of six thousand rupees in respect of the drugs specified in the books prescribed in First Schedule to the Act.

1. Subs. by G.S.R.73 (E), dt. 31-01-2003 and earlier Ins. by G.S.R. 701(E), dt. 27-9-2001.

Provided that the applicant shall furnish to the approving authority such additional information as may be required by it in connection with the application in Form 47:

Provided further that if the applicant applies for renewal of approval after its expiry but within six months of such expiry, the inspection fee payable shall be six thousand rupees plus an additional inspection fee at the rate of one thousand rupees per month in the case of testing of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs specified in First Schedule to the Act.

Explanation. - For the purpose of this Part, the words ―Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs‖ shall also mean and include the raw materials used in the manufacture of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs, as the case may be.

160B. Form in which approval to be granted for carrying out tests on Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs on behalf of licensees for manufacture of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs and conditions for grant or renewal of such approval.-- (1) Approval for carrying out such tests of identity, purity, quality and strength of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs as may be required under the provisions of these rules, on behalf of licensee for manufacture of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs shall be granted in Form 48.

(2) Before approval in Form 48 is granted or renewed, the following conditions shall be complied with by the applicants, namely: -

(i) The premises where the tests are carried out shall be well lighted and properly ventilated except where the nature of tests of any Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drug warrants otherwise. Wherever necessary, the premises shall be air-conditioned so as to maintain the accuracy and functioning of laboratory instruments or to enable the performance of special tests such as sterility tests and microbiological tests.

(ii) (a) The applicant shall provide adequate space having regard to the nature and number of samples of drugs proposed to be tested:

Provided that the approving authority shall determine from time to time whether the space provided continues to be adequate:

Provided further that separate section shall be provided for (i) Chemistry, (ii) Pharmacognosy, (iii) Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani, (iv) Microbiology, (v) Sample Room, (vi) Office-cum-Record Room, with proper partitions and minimum required area is 800 sq. ft.

1[(b) The applicant shall provide a list of persons who may be employed with him as experts, such as Chemist, Botanist and expert in Ayurveda/Siddha/Unani or Pharmacist who shall possess a degree in Chemistry, Botany, Ayurveda/Siddha/Unani/Bachelor in Pharmacy from a recognized University or equivalent, with experience for 2 years for carrying out tests or analysis as per the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Pharmacopoeias].

The applicant shall provide adequate equipment essential for carrying out tests for identity, purity, quality and strength of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs as per pharmacopoeial standards or other available standards.

List of equipment recommended is given below:

Chemistry Section

1. Alcohol determination apparatus complete set.
2. volatile oil determination apparatus.
3. Boiling point determination apparatus.
4. Melting point determination apparatus.
5. Refractometer.
6. Polarimeter.
7. Viscometer (Ostwalds, Redwood Viscometer).
8. Tablet disintegration apparatus.
9. Moisture determination apparatus (IC filtrator).
10. U.V.Spectro-photometer.
11. Muffle furnace.
12. Electronic Balance.
13. Hot air oven(s) different range of temperature/vacuum oven.
14. Refrigerator.
15. Glass distillation apparatus/plant.
16. Water supply demineralised exchange equipment/distillation equipment.
17. Air conditioner.
18. LPG Gas cylinder with burners.
19. Water bath (temperature controlled).
20. Heating mantle(4) or as required.
21. TLC apparatus with all accessories.
22. Sieves 10 to 120 with sieve shaker.
23. Centrifuge machine.
24. Dehumidifier.
25. pH meter.
26. G.L.C. with F.I. detector.
27. Silica crucible.
28. Tablet friability tester.
29. Tablet dissolution tester.
30. Other related equipment, reagents, glasswares etc.

Pharmacognosy Section

1. Microscope binocular.
2. Dissecting Microscope.
3. Microtome.
4. Chemical balance.
5. Microslide cabinet.
6. Aluminium slide trays.
7. Hot air oven.
8. Occular Micrometer.
9. Stage Micrometer.
10. Camera Lucida Prism type and mirror type.
11. Hot plates.
12. Refrigerator.
13. LPG Cylinder with burners.
14. Other related equipments, reagents, glasswares etc.

Note: Instuments like HPLC, HPTLC, Atomic Absorption spectrophotometer could be arranged by tie up with other laboratories.

Microbiology section

1. Laminar air flow bench (L.A.F.)
2. B.O.D. Incubator.
3. Plain Incubator.
4. Serological water bath.
5. Oven.
6. Autoclave/sterilizer.
7. Microscope (high power).
8. Colony counter.
9. Other related equipment and reagents.

(3). The applicant shall provide and maintain suitable equipment having regard to the nature and number of samples of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs intended to be tested which shall be adequate in the opinion of the approving authority.

(4) The testing of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs, as the case may be, for identity, purity, quality and strength shall be carried out under the active direction of one of the experts stated in clause (b) of sub-rule (2) who shall be the person-in-charge of testing and shall be held responsible for the reports of test issued by the applicant.

(5) The testing of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs, as the case may be, for identity, purity, quality and strength shall be carried out by persons whose qualifications and experience of testing are adequate as stated in clause (b) of sub-rule (2).

(6) The applicant shall provide books of standards recognized under the provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder and such books of reference as may be required in connection with the testing or analysis of the products for the testing of which approval is applied for.

(7) The applicant shall provide list of standard Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs (Reference samples) recognized under the provisions of the Act and rules made thereunder and such reference samples kept in the laboratory may be required in connection with the testing or analysis of the products of which approval is applied for.

160C. Duration of approval. - An approval granted in Form 48 or renewed in Form 49 unless sooner suspended or withdrawn, shall be valid for a period of three years from the date on which it is granted or renewed:

Provided that if an application for the renewal of an approval in Form 40 is made before its expiry or if the application is made within six months of its expiry after the payment of the additional inspection fee, the approval shall continue to be in force until orders to the contrary are passed on the application and approval shall be deemed to have expired if the application for renewal is not made within six months of expiry.

160D. Conditions of approval.–An approval in Form 48 shall be subject to the following conditions, namely: -

I. The Institution granted approval under this Part (hereinafter referred to as the approved laboratory) shall provide and maintain adequate staff and adequate premises and equipment as specified in rule 160-B.

II. The approved laboratory shall provide proper facilities for storage so as to preserve the properties of the samples to be tested by it.

III. The approved laboratory shall maintain records of tests for identity, purity, quality and strength carried out on all samples of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs and the results thereof together with the protocols of tests showing the readings and calculation in such form as to be available for inspection and such records shall be retained in the case of substances for which date of expiry is assigned; for a period of two years from such date of expiry and in the case of other substances, for a period of three years.

IV. The approved laboratory shall allow the Inspector appointed under this Act to enter with or without prior notice the premises where testing is carried out and to inspect the premises and the equipment used for test and the testing procedures employed. The laboratory shall allow the Inspectors to inspect the registers and records maintained under these rules and shall supply to such Inspectors such information as they may require for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of the Act and rules made thereunder have been observed.

V. The approved laboratory shall from time to time report to the approving authority any changes in the person-in-charge of testing of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs or the expert staff responsible for testing, as the case may be, and any material alterations in the premises or changes in the equipment used for the purposes of testing which have been made since the date of last inspection made on behalf of the approving authority before the grant or renewal of approval.

VI. The approved laboratory shall furnish reports of the results of tests or analysis in Form 50.

VII. In case any sample of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drug is found on test to be not of standard quality, the approved laboratory shall furnish to the approving authority and the licensing authority of the State where the manufacturer and/or sender of the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs is located, a copy of the test report of the sample with the protocols of tests applied.

VIII. The approved laboratory shall comply with the provisions of the Act and rules made thereunder and with such further requirements, if any, as may be specified in the rules made from time to time under Chapter IV-A of the Act of which the approving authority has given the approved laboratory not less than four months‘ notice.

IX. The approved laboratory shall maintain an inspection book to enable the Inspector to record his impression or defects noticed.

160-E. Inspection before grant of approval.— Before an approval in Form 48 is granted, the approving authority shall cause the laboratory at which the testing of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs, as the case may be, is proposed to be carried out to be inspected jointly by the Inspectors appointed or designated by the Central Government and State Government for this purpose, who shall examine the premises and the equipment intended to be used for testing of drugs and verify into the professional qualifications of the expert staff who are or may be employed by the laboratory.

160F. Report of inspection.— The Inspectors appointed by the Central Government as stated in Rule 160-E shall forward to the approving authority a detailed report of the results of the inspection.

160G. Procedure of approving authority. - (1) If the approving authority after such further enquiry, if any, as it may consider necessary, is satisfied that the requirements of the rules made under the Act have been complied with and that the conditions of the approval and the rules made under the Act have been observed, it shall grant approval in Form 48.

(2) If the approving authority is not satisfied, it shall reject the application and shall inform the applicant of the reasons for such rejection and of the conditions which shall be satisfied before approval could be granted.

160H. Application after rejection. - If within a period of six months from the rejection of an application for approval, the applicant informs the approving authority that the conditions laid down have been satisfied and deposits inspection fee of two thousand rupees, the approving authority may, if, after causing a further inspection to be made and after being satisfied that the conditions for grant of approval have been complied with, grant the approval in Form 48.

160-I. Renewal. - On an application being made for renewal, the approving authority shall, after causing an inspection to be made and if satisfied that the conditions of the approval and the rules made under the Act have been complied with, shall issue a certificate of renewal in Form 49.

160J. Withdrawal and suspension of approvals. - (1) The approving authority may, after giving the approved laboratory an opportunity to show cause why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing stating the reasons therefor, withdraw an approval granted under this Part or suspend it for such period as it thinks fit either wholly or in respect of testing of some of the categories of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs to which it relates, if in his opinion the approved laboratory had failed to comply with any of the conditions of the approval or with any provision of the Act or the rules made thereunder.

(2) Any approved laboratory, whose approval has been suspended or withdrawn, may, within three months of the date of the order of suspension or withdrawal, appeal to the State Government which shall dispose of the appeal in consultation with a panel of competent persons appointed by the Department of Indian Systems of Medicine & Homoeopathy, Government of India in this behalf and notified in the Official Gazette.]

1[PART XVII 2[LABELLING, PACKING AND LIMIT OF ALCOHOL IN] AYURVEDIC (INCLUDING SIDDHA) OR UNANI DRUGS

161. 2[Labelling, packing and limit of alcohol.]—(1) There shall be conspicuously displayed on the label of the container or package of an Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drug, the true list of all the ingredients 3[with the botanical names of plant based ingredients along with plant part(s) and form of ingredients, in which, these are] used in the manufacture of the preparation together with quantity of each of the ingredients incorporated therein and a reference to the method of preparation thereof as detailed in the standard text and Adikarana, as are prescribed in the authoritative books specified in the First Schedule to the Act 3[and in respect of Patent or Proprietary Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani drugs, the true list of all ingredients with the botanical names of plant based ingredients along with part(s) and form of ingredients, in which, these are used in the formulation, with their quantity]:

Provided that if the list of ingredients contained in the medicine is large and cannot be accommodated on the label, the same may be printed separately and enclosed with packing and reference be made to this effect on the label.

(2) The container of a medicine for internal use made up ready for the treatment of human ailments shall, if it is made up from a substance specified in Schedule E (1), be labelled conspicuously with the words ̳Caution: To be taken under medical supervision‘ both in English and Hindi language.

1. Ins. by notification F.1-23/6, dt. 2.2.1970. 3. Ins. by G.S.R. 844(E), dt. 26.11.2012

(3) Subject to the other provisions of these rules, the following particulars shall be either printed or written in indelible ink and shall appear in a conspicuous manner on the label of the innermost container of any Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drug 2[Patent or Proprietary Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani drugs] and on any other covering in which the container is packed', namely−

(i) The name of the drug. 3[For Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani drugs] this purpose the name shall be the same as mentioned in the authoritative books included in the First Schedule of the Act.
(ii) A correct statement of the net content in terms of weight, measure or number as the case may be. The weight and volume shall be expressed in metric system.

(iii) The name and address of the manufacturer.

(iv) The number of the licence under which the drug is manufactured, the figure representing the manufacturing licence number being preceded by the words ̳Manufacturing Licence Number‘ or ̳Mfg. Lic. No.‘ or ̳M.L.‘.

(v) A distinctive batch number, that is to say, the number by reference to which details of manufacture of the particular batch from which the substance in the container is taken are recorded and are available for inspection, the figure representing the batch number being preceded by the words ―Batch No.‖ or ―Batch‖ or ―Lot Number‖ or ―Lot No.‖ or ―Lot‖ or any distinguishing prefix.

(vi) The date of manufacture. For this purpose the date of manufacture shall be the date of completion of the final products, or the date of bottling or packing for issue.

(vii) The words ―Ayurvedic medicine‖ or ―Siddha medicine‖ or ―Unani medicine‖ as the case may be.

(viii) The words ―FOR EXTERNAL USE ONLY‖ if the medicine is for external application.

(ix) Every drug intended for distribution to the medical profession, as a free sample shall, while complying with the labelling provisions under clauses (i) to (viii), further bear on the label of the container the words ―Physicians sample. Not to be sold‖ which shall be over-printed.

1[(x)(a) Preparation (Asavas) with high content of alcohol as base

Name of the drug Maximum size of packing (i) Karpur Asava 15 ml

(ii) Ahiphenasava 15 ml

(iii) Margamadasava 15 ml

(ix)(b) Preparations containing self-generated alcohol Name of the drug Maximum content of alcohol (Ethyl alcohol v/v) Maximum size of packing (i) Mritsanjivani Sura 16 per cent 30 ml.

(ii) Mahadrakshasava 16 per cent 120 ml.]

(4) Nothing in these rules shall be deemed to require the labelling of any transparent cover or of any wrapper case or other covering used solely for the purpose of packing, transport or delivery.

1[161A. Exemption in labeling and packing, provisions for export of Ayurvedic (including Siddha) and Unani drugs.- (1) Labels and packages or containers of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs for export may be adopted to meet the specific requirements of the law of the country to which the said drug is to be exported, but the following particulars shall appear in conspicuous position on the container in which drug is packed and on every other covering in which that container is packed, namely :
(a) Name of the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drug (Single or compound formulations;
(b) the name, address of the manufacturer and the number of licence under which the drug has been manufactured;
(c) batch or lot number;
(d) date of manufacture, along with the date for ―Best for use before‖;
(e) main ingredients, if required by the importing country;
(f) for export:
Provided that where Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Single or compound drug not classified under the First Schedule or Schedule E-(I), is required by the consignee to be not labeled with the name and address of the manufacturer, the labels on packages or containers shall bear a code number as approved by the Licensing Authority mentioned in rule 152.
(2) the provisions of Rule 161 shall not apply to a medicine made up ―ready for treatment‖, whether after, or without, alteration, which is supplied on the prescription of a registered medical practitioner if the medicine is labeled with the following particulars, namely:– (a) the name and address of the suppliers;
(b) the words ―For External Use Only‖, if the medicine is for external application.]

2[161B. 1. The date of expiry of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani medicines shall be conspicuously displayed on the label of container or package of an Ayurvedic, Siddhas and Unani medicines, and after the said date of expiry, these medicines shall not be in circulation.
2. The Shelf-life i.e. for Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani medicines shall be as follows:-

(i) Shelf life or date of expiry for Ayurvedic medicines.
Sl. No.
Name of the Group of Ayurvedic Medicine Shelf life and date ofexpiry with effect fromthe date of manufacture Churna, Kwatha Churna 2 years Gutika (Vati-Gutti, Pills, Tablets except Gutika with Rasa) 3 years (i) Gutika Tablet containing Kasth aushadhi (ii) Gutika,Tablet containing Kasth aushadi and Rasa, Uprasa, Metallic Bhasmas, and Guggulu.
3 years 5 years Rasaushadhies No expiry date1 Asava Arista No expiry date1 Avaleha 3 years Guggulu 5 years Mandura - Lauha 10 years

Ghrita 2 years Taila 3 years Arka 1 year Dravaka, Lavana, Ksara 5 years Lepa Churna 3 years Dant Manjan Powder 2 years Dant Manjan Paste 2 years Lepa Guti 3 years Lepa Malahar (Ointment)/Liniment/Gels/ lotions /creams 3 years Varti 2 years (one time use) Ghana Vati 3 years Kupipakva Rasayan No expiry date1 Parpati No expiry date1 Sveta parpati 2 years Pisti and Bhasma No expiry date1 Svarna, Rajata, Lauha, Mandura, Abhraka bhasma,Godanti, ShankhaBhasma, etc.
No expiry date1 Naga Bhasma, Vanga Bhasma, Tamra Bhasma2 5 years2 Capsules made of soft gelatin (depending upon thecontent material) for Kashtha aushadhi 3 years Capsules of hard gelatin (depending upon the content material) -containing Kasth aushdhi with Rasa, Bhasma,Parad-Gandhak 5 years2 Syrup/liquid oral 3 years (Kama/Nasa Bindu) Ear/Nasal drops Eye drops 2 years 1 year Khand/Granule/Pak 3 years Dhoopans-Inhalers 2 years Pravahi Kwatha (with preservatives) 3 years Note 1. Item at Sr. No.4, 5, 19, 20, 22, 23 have very long shelf life and they became more efficacious with the passage of time and period of ten years shall be mandatory for keeping the records of such items.
Note 2. Bhasmas at Sr. No. 23, start solidifying after five years and they need one or two ̳Puta‘again before using in the dosage form.

(ii) Shelf life or date of expiry for Siddha Medicines Sl. No.
Name of the Group of Medicine Shelf life and date ofexpiry with effect from the date of manufacture Karpam No expiry date* Cunnam 5 years Kalanku No expiry date* Kattu No expiry date* Parpam No expiry date* Centuram No expiry date* Karuppu No expiry date* Patankam 5 years Kulampu 5 years Meluku 5 years Tinir 2 years Tiravakam 2 years Mattirai 3 years

Tailam 3 years Ilakam 3 years Iracayanaam 3 years Ney 2 years Manappaku 3 years Venney 3 years Vatakam 3 years Curanam 2 years Pura Maruntukal 5 years Note. * Items at Sr. No.1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 22 have very long shelf life and they became more efficacious with the passage of time and period of ten years shall be mandatory for keeping the records of such items.

(iii) Shelf life or date of expiry for Unani System of Medicines

Sl. No.
Name of the Group of Medicine Shelf life and date ofexpiry with effect from the date of manufacture Habb (Pills) 3 years Qurs (Tablets) 3 years Majoon/Dawa 3 years Khamira 3 years Itrifal 3 years Tiryaq 3 years Laooq 2 years Laboob 2 years Halwa 2 years Mufarreh/Yaqooti 2 years Burood/Surma/Kohal 3 years Kushta 5 years Raughaniyat 3 years Marham/Zimad/Qairooti 3 years Ayarij/Sufoof 2 years Safoof (Namak wala/containing salt) 1 year Sharbat/Sikanjabeen 3 years Jawarish 3 years Capsule 3 years Arq 1 year

Qutoor 1 year Nabeez 5 years Murabba 1 year Tila 2 years]

1[PART XVIII

GOVERNMENT ANALYSTS AND INSPECTORS FOR AYURVEDIC (INCLUDING SIDDHA) OR UNANI DRUGS

162. Duties of Inspectors specially authorised to inspect the manufacture of Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs—Subject to the instructions of the controlling authority, it shall be the duty of an Inspector authorised to inspect the manufacture of Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs–

1. Ins. by notification F.1-23/6, dt. 2-2-1970.

(i) to inspect not less than twice a year, all premises licensed for manufacture of Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs within the area allotted to him and to satisfy himself that the conditions of the licence and the provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder are being observed;
(ii) to send forthwith to the controlling authority after each inspection a detailed report indicating whether or not the conditions of the licence and the provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder are being observed;
(iii) to take samples of the drugs manufactured on the premises and send them for test or analysis in accordance with these rules;
(iv) to institute prosecutions in respect of violation of the Act and the Rules made thereunder.

1[162A. Qualifications of the State Drug Licensing Authority for Licensing of Ayurvdeda , Siddha and Unani drugs− (a) The Ayurvedic/ Siddha/ Unani qualifications as per Schedule II of the Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970 (84 of 1970)/ B Pharma (Ayurveda) of a recognized University.
(b) At least 5 years experience in the Ayurveda/ Siddha/ Unani drug manufacturing or testing of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs or enforcement of provisions of Chapter IVA of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act,1940 and Rules made thereunder or teaching/ research on clinical practice of Ayurveda/ Siddha/ Unani System.]

163. Procedure for despatch of sample to Government Analyst and its receipt by the Government Analyst—(1) Sample for test or analysis shall be sent to the Government Analyst by registered post or by hand in a sealed package, enclosed together with a memorandum in Form 18-A in an outer cover addressed to the Government Analyst.
(2) The package as well as the outer cover shall be marked with a distinguishing number.
(3) A copy of the memorandum and a specimen impression of the seal used to seal the package shall be sent by registered post or by hand to the Government Analyst.
(4) On receipt of the package from an Inspector, the Government Analyst or an Officer authorised by him in writing in this behalf shall open the package and shall also record the conditions of the seals on the package.
(5) After the test or analysis has been completed, one copy of the results of the test or analysis shall be supplied forthwith to the sender in Form 13-A. A copy of the result in Form 13A shall also be sent simultaneously to the Controlling Authority and to the Drugs Controller, India.

2[PHARMACOPOEIAL LABORATORY FOR INDIAN MEDICINES TO FUNCTION AS CENTRAL DRUGS LABORATORY FOR THE PURPOSE OF TESTING OR ANALYSIS OF AYURVEDA, SIDDHA AND UNANI DRUGS

163.A Functions - The Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian Medicine at Ghaziabad shall function as a Central Drugs Laboratory for the purpose of testing or analysis of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Drugs.
Its functions shall be:- (1) to develop Pharmacopoeial standards and draft monographs and amendments alongwith standardized methods for the Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani drugs;
(2) to act as Central Appellate Drug Laboratory for testing of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs, (3) to analyse or test such samples of Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani drugs as may be sent to it under sub-section (2) of section 11, or under sub-section (4) or section 25, of the Act;
(4) to maintain reference museum and herbarium for the drugs used in Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani (ASU) system.
(5) to run a training centre for quality control methods in the Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani systems of medicines;
(6) to carry out such other duties as may be entrusted to it by the Government of India.

163B. The functions of the Central Drug Laboratory in respect of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs shall be carried out at the Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani medicine, Ghaziabad, (Uttar Pradesh) and the functions of the Director in respect of the said drugs shall be exercised by the Director of the said laboratory.

163C. Despatch of samples for test or analysis - (1) Samples for testing or analysis of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs under Sub-section (2) of Section 11 or sub-section (1) of section 25 and section 33-H of the Act shall be sent by registered post in a sealed packet, enclosed with a memorandum in Form 1 A, specified in Schedule A, in an outer cover addressed to the Director, Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian Medicine.

(2) The packet as well as the outer cover, shall be marked with a distinguished number.

(3) A copy of the memorandum in Form 1A and a specimen impression of the seal used to seal the packet shall be sent separately by registered post to the Director, Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian Medicine.

163D. Recording of condition of seals - On receipt of the packet, it shall be opened by an officer authorized in writing on that behalf by the Director, Pharmacopoeial laboratory for Indian Medicine, who shall record the condition of the seal on the packet.

163E. Report of result of test or analysis - After test or analysis, the result of the test or analysis, together with full protocols of the tests applied, shall be supplied forthwith to the sender in Form 2A of as specified in the said schedule.

163F. Fees - The fees for test and analysis shall be as specified in Schedule B-1

163G. Signature on certificates - Certificates issued under these rules by the Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian Medicine, shall be signed by the Director or by an officer authorized by the Central Government to sign such certificates.

164. Method of test or analysis to be employed in relation to Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs.—The method of test or analysis to be employed in relation to an Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drug shall be such as may be specified in the Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani Pharmacopoeia, or if no such pharmacopoeias are available or if no tests are specified in such pharmacopoeias, such tests as the Government Analyst may employ, such tests being scientifically established to determine whether the drug contains the ingredients as stated on the label.

165. Qualifications of Government Analyst. —A person who is appointed a Government Analyst under section 33 F of the Act shall be a person possessing the qualifications prescribed in rule 44 or a degree in Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani System, as the case may be, conferred by a University, a State Government or Statutory Faculties, Councils and Boards of Indian Systems of Medicine recognized by the Central or State Government, as the case may be, for this purpose and has had not less than three years‘ post graduate experience in the analysis of drugs in a laboratory under the control of (i) a Government Analyst appointed under the Act, or (ii) a Chemical Examiner to Government, or (iii) the Head of an institution specially approved for the purpose by the appointing authority.

166. Duties of Government Analyst– (1) The Government Analyst shall analyze or test or cause to be analyzed or tested such samples of Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs as may be sent to him by Inspectors or any other persons or authority authorised by the Central Government or State Government under the provisions of Chapter IV A of the Act and shall furnish reports of the results of test or analysis in accordance with these rules.

(2) A Government Analyst appointed under section 33F shall from time to time forward to the Government reports giving the result of analytical work and research with a view to their publications at the discretion of the Government.]

1[167. Qualifications of Inspector.–A person who is appointed an Inspector under section 33G shall be a person who— (a) has the qualifications laid down under rule 49 and shall have undergone practical training in the manufacture of Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drug, as the case may be; or

(b) has a degree in Ayurvedic or Siddha or Unani System or a degree in Ayurveda Pharmacy, as the case may be, conferred by a University or State Government or a Statutory Faculty, Council or Board of Indian Systems of Medicine recognized by the Central Government or the State Government for this purpose; or

(c) has a diploma in Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani Systems, as the case may be, granted by a State Government or an Institution recognized by the Central Government or a State Government for this purpose.

2[PART XIX STANDARDS OF AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA AND UNANI DRUGS

168. Standards to be complied with in manufacture for sale or for distribution of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs.-

Class of Drugs Standards to be complied with
1. 3 [* * *] drugs included in Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia.

2. Asavas and Arishtas

The standards for identity, purity and strength as given in the editions of Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India for the time being in force.

The upper limit of alcohol as self generated alcohol should not exceed 12% v/v excepting those that are otherwise notified by the Central Government from time to time.]

1. Amended by G.S.R. 376 (E), dt. 20.7.1978.
3.The word ―Single‖ omitted by G.S.R. 422(E), dt. 11.6.2002.

1[169. Permitted Excipients.- Permitted Excipients along with their standards i.e. additives, preservatives, antioxidants, flavouring agents, chelating agents etc. permitted in the Indian Pharmacopoeia (IP), Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 and Bureau of Indian Standard Act, 1986 are permitted for use in Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs with the following conditions, namely:-
1. The above excipients shall be used in the permissible limits as prescribed in the Indian Pharmacopoeia/ Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954/ Food Product Order/ Bureau of Indian Standard Act, 1986 and they shall comply with the respective quality specifications, not exceeding any specified limits of usage therein, and except Hydrogenated vegetable oil.

2. Only Natural coloring agents as permitted under rule 26 of Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955 will be used for Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs and additionally, colors permitted under Rule 127 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 shall be used for Proprietary Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs as defined in subclause (i) of clause (h) of section 3 of Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, not exceeding any specified limits of usage therein.

3. Preservatives and Coloring agents shall be mentioned on the label for the information of the consumer as required under rule 161 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.

4. Additives used in various processes and in formulating dosage forms shall be mentioned clearly with quantities used, in the application for licenses and the record for the same shall be maintained by the manufacturers.

5. Manufacturers shall be responsible to ensure rationality, safety and quantity used of various excipients in the formulation.

6. If any excipients or additive or preservative etc. referred in Indian Pharmacopoeia/ Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954/ Food Product Order/ Bureau of Indian Standard Act, 1986 is deleted at a particular point of time, this will also be deleted simultaneously for the use in Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs.

7. Following artificial sweeteners as per maximum limit indicated below may be used in various dosage forms of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani Proprietary Medicines:-

Artificial sweeteners may be used only in proprietary ASU products and the label of such products should carry a statutory warning stating the name and quantity of the artificial sweetener used.

The recommended Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI) of these sweeteners as laid down by US FDA is as follows:

Sr. No. Sucralose Aspartame Saccharin Acesulfame K

5 mg/kg body 40 mg/kg body 5 mg/kg body 15 mg/kg body weight weight

weight weight

One third of the above ADI would be permissible for use in Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani Patent and Proprietary Drugs.

8. Any previous notification issued by the Department of AYUSH regarding use of excipients / additives or preservatives in Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani medicines stands superseded.]

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 755 (E), dt. 23.10.2008. Earlier ins. by G.S.R. 285 (E), dt. 11.5.2005.

SCHEDULE A FORM 1 (See rule 4)

Memorandum to the Central Drugs Laboratory Serial Number ...

To the Director, Central Drugs Laboratory ...
From...
I send herewith, under the provisions of section 25 (4) of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, sample(s) of a drug purporting to be ...for test or analysis and request that a report of the result of the test or analysis may be supplied to this Court.
(2) The distinguishing number on the packet is ...
(3) Particulars of offence alleged ...
(4) Matter on which opinion is required ...
(5) A fee of Rs ... has been deposited in Court.

Date ... ...
Magistrate

(See rule 163C)

Memorandum to the Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian Medicine (PLIM) From ...

(Full name, Designation and Postal address of the sender) Serial No...
To the Director, Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian Medicine, I send herewith, under the provisions of section 11(2)/section 25(4) and section 33H of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, sample(s) of a drug purporting to be ...for test or analysis and request that a report of the result of the test or analysis may be supplied to this Court.
(2) The distinguishing number on the packet is ...
(3) Particulars of offence alleged ...
(4) Matter on which opinion is required ...
(5) A fee of Rs ... has been deposited in Court.

Date ... ...
Magistrate/Authorized Signatory]

FORM 2 (See rule 6)

Certificate of test or analysis by the Central Drugs Laboratory Certified that the sample bearing number ... ...
purporting to be a sample of. ... received on ... with memorandum No ... dated... from ... has been tested / analysed and that t he result of s uch t e s t / analysis is as stated below.
2. The condition of the seals on the packet on receipt was as follows: —
*3. In the opinion of the undersigned the sample is of standard quality is not of standard quality as defined in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rules thereunder for the reasons given below:–

Director Date... Central Drugs Laboratory or other authorised officer Details of results of test or analysis with protocols of test applied

Director

Date...Central Drugs Laboratory or other authorised officer
* If opinion is required on any other matter, the paragraph should be suitably amended.

1[FORM 2A (See rule 163E)

Certificate of test or analysis from the Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian Medicine or Governmen Analyst Certified that the sample bearing number ... ...
purporting to be a sample of. ... received on ... with memorandum No ... dated... from ... has been tested / analysed and that t he result of s uch t e s t / analysis is as stated below.
2. The condition of the seals on the packet on receipt was as follows: —
*3. In the opinion of the undersigned the sample is of standard quality as defined in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rules thereunder for the reasons given below.
Or In the opinion of the undersigned the sample is not of standard quality as defined in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rules thereunder for the reasons given below.
―Note: *delete whichever is not applicable.‖

(Signature of the Analyst Person-in-Charge of testing) Date...
Place...
Name & Designation and Seal...
Name and Address of the laboratory ...]

1FORMS 3-7 (Omitted)

(See rule 24)

Application for licence to import drugs (excluding those specified in Schedule X) to the I/We* ... (full address with telephone number, fax number and e-mail address) hereby apply for a licence to import drugs specified below manufactured by M/s ... (full address with telephone no, fax and e- mail no.).
2. Names of the drugs to be imported:
(1) (2) (3)
3. I/We* ... enclose herewith an undertaking in Form 9 dated ...signed by the manufacturer as required by rule 24 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.

4. I/We* ... enclose herewith a copy of Registration Certificate concerning the drugs to be imported in India, issued under Form 41 of the rules, vide Registration Certificate No ...dated ... issued through M/s.
... (name and full address) ...valid up to ...

5 I/We* ... hold a valid wholesale licence for sale or distribution of drugs or valid licence to manufacture drugs, under the provisions of the Act and rules made thereunder. A copy of the said licence is enclosed.

6. A fee of ...has been credited to Government under the Head of Account "0210Medical and Public Health, 04-Public Health, 104-Fees and Fines" under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 - Central vide Challan No ... dated ...(attached in original)

Place: ...
Date: ...
*Delete whichever is not applicable.]

Signature ...
Name...
Designation ...
Seal/Stamp of Manufacturer's agent in India.

1. Forms 3 to 7 omitted by Notfn. No. F. 1-16/57-D, dt. 15-6-1957.
2. Subs. by G.S.R. 604(E) , dt. 24.8.2001.

1[FORM 8A

(See rule 24)

Application for licence to import drugs specified in Schedule X to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945

I/We* ... (full address with telephone number, fax number and e-mail address) hereby apply for a licence to import drugs specified below manufactured by M/s ... (full address with telephone no, fax and e-mail no.).
2. Name of the drugs to be imported:

(1) (2) (3)
3. I/We* ... enclose herewith an undertaking in Form 9 dated...signed by t h e manufacturer a s required by rule 24 of the Drugs a nd Cosmetics Rules, 1945.
4. I/We* ... enclose herewith a copy of Registration Certificate concerning the drugs to be imported in India, issued under Form 41 of the rules, vide Registration Certificate No dated issued through M/s.
... (name and full address) ... ...
valid upto...

5. I/We* ... hold a valid wholesale licence for sale or distribution of drug or licence to manufacture drugs, under the provisions of the Act and rules made thereunder.
A copy of the said licence is enclosed.

6. A fee of ... has been credited to Government under the Head of Account "0210 - Medical and Public Health, 04- Public Health, 104- Fees and Fines" under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules 1945 - Central vide Challan No ... dated ...
(attached in original).

Place: ...
Date: ...
*Delete whichever is not applicable.

Signature ...
Name ...
Designation ...
Seal/Stamp of Manufacturer's agent in India.]

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 604(E), dt.24.8.2001.

FORM 9 (See rule 24)

Form of undertaking to accompany an application for an import licence

Whereas ... of... intends to apply for a licence under the

Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945, for the import into India, of the drugs specified below manufactured by us, we...of...hereby give this undertaking that for the duration of the said licence— (1) the said applicant shall be our agent for the import of drugs into India;
(2) we shall comply with the conditions imposed on a licence by 1[rules 74 and 78] of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945;
(3)we declare that we are carrying on the manufacture of the drugs mentioned in this undertaking at the premises specified below, and we shall from time to time report any change of premises on which manufacture will be carried on and in cases where manufacture is carried on in more than one factory any change in the distribution of functions between the factories;

(4) we shall comply with the provisions of Part IX of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945;

(5) every drug manufactured by us for import under licence into India shall as regards strength, quality and purity conform with the provisions of Chapter III of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, and the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945;

(6) we shall comply with such further requirements, if any, as may be specified by Rules, by the Central Government under the Act and of which the licensing authority has given to the licensee not less than four months' notice.

Names of drugs and classes of drugs Particulars of premises where manufacture is carried on.

Date... 2[Signature, Name, Designation Seal/Stamp of manufacturer or on behalf of the manufacturer.]

1. Subs. by. G.S.R. 462(E), dt. 22.6.1982.

.
(See rules 23 and 27) Licence to import drugs (excluding those specified in Schedule X) to the Drugs and Cosmetic Rules, 1945

Licence Number ... Date... ...
1. ... (Name and full address of the importer) is hereby licensed to import into India during the period for which the licence is in force, the drugs specified below, manufactured by M/s ...
(name and full address) and any other drugs manufactured by the said manufacturer as may from time to time be endorsed on this licence.
2. This licence shall be in force from ... to ... unless it is sooner suspended or cancelled under the said rules.
3. Names of drugs to be imported.

Place : ...
Date : ... Licensing Authority

Seal/Stamp

Conditions of Licence.

1. A photocopy of licence shall be displayed in a prominent place in a part of the premises, and the original licence shall be produced, whenever required.
2. Each batch of drug imported into India shall be accompanied with a detailed batch test report and a batch release certificate, duly signed and authenticated by the manufacturer with date of testing, date of release and the date of forwarding such reports. The imported batch of each drug shall be subjected to examination and testing as the licensing authority deems fit prior to its marketing.

3. The licensee shall be responsible for the business activities of the manufacturer in India along with the registration holder and his authorised agent.

4. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority forthwith in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the licensing authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.]

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 604(E) ,dt. 24.8.2001.

1[FORM 10A

(See rules 23 and 27)

Licence to import drugs specified in Schedule X to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945

Licence Number ... Date...
...(Name and full address of the importer) is hereby licensed to import into India during the period for which the licence is in force, the drugs specified below, manufactured by M/s ... (name and full address) and any other drugs manufactured by the said manufacturer as may from time to time be endorsed on this licence.
2. This licence shall be in force from ... to ... unless it is sooner suspended or cancelled under the said rules.
3. Names of drugs to be imported.
Place:...
Date: ...

*Delete whichever is not applicable.

Licensing Authority Seal/Stamp.

Conditions of Licence

1. A photocopy of licence shall be displayed in a prominent place in a part of the premises, and the original licence shall be produced, whenever required.

2. Each batch of drug imported into India shall be accompanied with a detailed batch test report and a batch release certificate, duly signed and authenticated by the manufacturer with date of testing, date of release and the date of forwarding such reports. The imported batch of each drug shall be subjected to examination and testing as the licensing authority deems fit prior to its marketing.

3. The licensee shall be responsible for the business activities of the manufacturer in India along with the registration holder and his authorised agent.

4. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority forthwith in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the licensing authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.]

FORM 11 (See rule 33)

Licence to import drugs for the purposes of examination, test or analysis

1 ...of ... is hereby licensed to import from ... the drugs specified below for the purposes of examination, test or analysis at ...or in such other places as the licensing authority may from time to time authorise.
2. This licence is subject to the conditions prescribed in the Rules under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
3. This licence shall, unless previously suspended or revoked, be in force for a period of one year from the date specified below:– Name of drugs Quantities which may be imported

Date... Licensing Authority Seal/Stamp

1 [FORM 1 1 A (See rule 33A) Licence to import drugs by a Government Hospital or Autonomous Medical Institution for the treatment of patients

Licence No ... Date...
Dr. ... ...Designation ...of ...
(Name of College/Hospital/Autonomous Institution)

is hereby licenced to import from M/s ...(name and full address) the drugs specified below for the purpose of treatment of patients for the disease (name of the disease) ... at ... or in such other places as the licensing authority may from time to time authorise.
2. This licence shall, unless previously suspended or revoked, be in force for a period of one year from the date of issue specified above.

3. Names of drugs to be imported:

Name of drugs Quantities which may be imported

Place : ...
Date :...

Conditions of Licence Licensing Authority Seal / Stamp
1. The licence shall be displayed in the Office of the Medical Superintendent of Government Hospital / Head of Institution of Autonomous Medical Institution.
2. The licensee shall store the drugs imported under this licence under proper storage conditions.
3. The drugs imported under this licence shall be exclusively used for the treatment of patients, and a record shall be maintained in this regard, by a registered pharmacist giving the full name(s) and address(es) of the patients, diagnosis, dosage schedule, total quantity of drugs imported and issued, and shall be countersigned by the Medical Superintendent of the Government Hospital or Head of the Autonomous Medical Institution which shall be produced, on demand by an Inspector appointed under the Act.]

1. Subs. by G.S.R.. 604(E), dt. 24.8.2001.

FORM 12 (See rule 34)

Application for licence to import drugs for purpose of examination, test or analysis

I,... ...resident of ... by occupation... hereby apply for a licence to import the drugs specified below for the purposes of examination, test or analysis at ... from ...and I undertake to comply with the conditions applicable to the licence.

1[A fee of rupees ... has been credited to Government under the head of

Account ―0210-Medical and Public Health, 04-Public Health, 104-Fees and Fines‖ under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945—Central vide Challan No...dated...(attached in original).]

Name of drugs Quantities which may be imported

Place...
Date...

Licensing Authority

1. Subs. by G.S.R. .604(E), dt. 24.8.2001.

1[FORM 12A

(See rule 36, Second Proviso)

Application for the issue of a permit to import small quantities of drugs for personal use

I, ... resident of ...by occupation... hereby apply for a permit to import the drugs specified below for personal use from ...

I attach a prescription from a registered medical practitioner in regard to the need for the said drugs.

Name of drugs Quantities which may be imported

Date... Signature...

1. Added by Notifn No. F.1-36/54-DS, dt: 3.3.1955.

1[FORM 12AA (See rule 34A)

Application for licence to import small quantities of new drugs by a Government Hospital or Autonomous Medical Institution for the treatment of patients.

I, ... ... (name and designation) ... ...
of ... (name of the Hospital/Autonomous Medical Institution) hereby apply for a licence to import small quantities of new drugs specified below for the purpose of treatment of patients for the disease ... (name of the disease)... ... ... at...(name and place of the hospital) and I undertake to comply with the conditions applicable to the licence and other provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the rules made thereunder, from time to time.

1. A fee of rupees ... has been credited to Government under the Head of Account "0210-Medical and Public Health, 04- Medical and Public Health, 104- Fees and Fines" under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 - Central vide Challan No...dated ... (attached in original).
2. Name of new drugs to be imported:

Name of drugs Quantities which may be imported

Place: ... Signature...
Date: ... Name...
Seal/Stamp...

Certificate Certified that the drugs specified above for import are urgently required for the treatment of patients suffering from and that the said drug(s) is/are not available in India.

Place... Signature ... ...
Date ... Medical Superintendent of the Government Hospital / Head of Autonomous Medical Institution Seal / Stamp.]

1. Subs. by. G.S.R. 604(E), dt. 24.8.2001.

1[FORM 12B (See rule 36, Second Proviso)

Permit for the import of small quantities of drugs for personal use ...of ... is hereby permitted to import from... the drugs specified below for personal use.
2. This permit is subject to the conditions prescribed in the Rules under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
3. This permit shall, unless previously suspended or revoked, be in force for a period of six months from date specified below.

Name of drugs Quantities which may be imported

Date... Licensing Authority]

FORM 13 (See rule 46) Certificate of test or analysis by Government Analyst under section 25 (1) of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940

1. Name of Inspector from whom received ...
2. Serial No. and date of Inspector's memorandum...
3. Number of sample ...
4. Date of receipt ...
5. Name of drugs purporting to be contained in the sample ...
6. Condition of seals on the 2[packet or on portion of sample or container] ...
7. Result of test or analysis with protocols of test or analysis applied ...

In the opinion of the undersigned the sample referred to above (is of standard/is not of standard) quality as defined in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rules thereunder for the reasons given below.
for the reasons given below:-

Date... Government Analyst.

1. Subs. by. G.S.R. 753(E), dt. 4.11.1999.

1[FORM 13A

[See rule 163 (5)]

Certificates of tests or analysis by Government Analyst under section 33H of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940
1. Names of Inspector from whom received ...
2. Serial No. and date of Inspector's memorandum ...

3. Number of sample...
4. Date of receipt ...
5. Names of ingredients purporting to have been used in the preparation of the sample...
6. Condition of seals on the package ...
7. Results of test or analysis ...

2[In the opinion of the undersigned the sample referred to above is of standard/is not of standard quality as defined in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the rules made thereunder for the reasons given below]

Date... Government Analyst..]

FORM 14A (See rule 47)

Application from a purchaser for test or analysis of a drug under Section 26 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940
1. Full name and address of the applicant ...
2. Occupation...
3. Name of drug purporting to be contained in the sample ...
4. Name and full address of the pharmacy or concern where the drug was purchased...
5. Date on which purchased...
6. Reasons why the drug is being submitted for test or analysis...
3 [7. A fee of rupees ... vide Schedule B of the Drugs and

Cosmetics Rules, 1945, has been credited to Government under the head of account "080— Medical—Miscellan e ou s—Fees und er th e Drug s and Co smetics Ru les, 194 5— Central/State"—vide treasury receipt attached.]

I hereby declare that the drug being submitted for test was purchased by or for me. I further declare that the sample of the drug being sent for test or analysis is exactly as it was purchased and has not been tampered with in any way to reduce its potency.

Date... Signed... ...

1. Added by Notfn. No. F 1-23/67-D (S.O. 642), dt. 2.2.1970.
2. Ins. By G.S.R. 376(E), dt: 3..5.2010.
3. Added by Notfn. No. F. 1-3/51-D.S., dt. 15-10-1954

FORM 14-B

(See rule 47) Certificate of test or analysis by Government Analyst under Section 26 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940
1. Name of person from whom sample received ...
2. Date of receipt ...
3. Name of drug purporting to be contained in the sample ...
4. Opinion of the Government Analyst—The sample referred to above is/is not of standard quality as defined in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rules thereunder.

Date... Government Analyst...

(See rules 54 and 145C)

Order under section 22 (1)(c) of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 requiring a person not to dispose of stock in his possession Whereas, I have reasons to believe that the stocks of drugs/cosmetics in your possession, detailed below contravene the provisions of section 18 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940;

Now, therefore, I hereby require you under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 22 of the said Act not to dispose of the said stock for a period of ... days from the date of this order.

Date... Inspector...

Details of stock of drugs/ cosmetics

Date... Inspector...]

(See rules 55 and 145-B)

Receipt for stock of drugs or cosmetics for record, register, document or material object seized under section 22 (1) (c) or (cc) of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
The stock of drugs or cosmetics for records, registers, documents or material objects detailed below has / have this day been seized by me under the provisions of clause (c) or clause (cc) of sub-section (1) of section 22 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act. 1940 (23 of 1940) from the premises of ... situated at...

Date... Inspector. ...
Details of drugs, cosmetics, records, registers, documents or material objects seized.

Date... Inspector. ...]

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 1594, dt. 28.10.1976.
2. Subs. by. G.S.R. 926 , dt. 24-6-1977.

1 [FORM 17 (See rules 56 and 145A)

Intimation to person from whom sample is taken

I have this day taken from the premises of ...situated at... samples of the drugs / cosmetics specified below for the purpose of test or analysis.

Date... Inspector. ...

Details of samples taken

Date... Inspector. ...]

2[FORM 17A

(See rules 56A and 145AA)

Receipt for samples of drugs or cosmetics taken where fair price tendered thereof under sub- section (I) of Section 23 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 is refused To ...

Whereas I, this... day of ... 3[20] ..., have taken from the premises of... situated at... samples of drugs/cosmetics as specified below:- Details of Samples...

And whereas I had offered to pay you rupees ... as the fair price of the samples of drugs/cosmetics taken:
And whereas, you have refused to accept the fair price tendered thereof.

Now, therefore, I give you the receipt as the fair price tendered for the samples of the drugs/cosmetics taken by me.

Date: ... Inspector ... ...]

Subs. by S.O. 2139, dt. 5.6.1972.
Ins. by G.S.R. 292(E) , dt. 29.5.1997.
Subs. by G.S.R. 592(E) , dt. 13.8.2008.

FORM 18 (See Rule 57)

Memorandum to Government Analyst Serial No. of Memorandum ...
From:
To The Government Analyst ...
...
The portion of sample / container described below is sent herewith for test or analysis under the provisions of clause (i) of sub-section (4) of Section 23 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

The portion of sample/container has been marked by me with the following mark.
Details of portion of sample or container with 1[name of drug/cosmetic] which it purports to contain— Date... Inspector. ...

2[FORM 18A (See Rule 163 (1)) Memorandum to Government Analyst Serial No...
From To The Government Analyst ...
...
The portion of sample / container described below is sent herewith for test or analysis under the provisions of Section 33H of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

The portion of sample / container has been marked by me with the following mark.

Details of portion of sample or container with name of ingredients from which it is claimed to be made.

Date... Inspector. ...

2. Added by Notfn. No. F 1-23/67-D, dt. 2-2-1970.

[See rule 59 (2)] Application for grant or renewal of a 2[licence to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] of drugs other than those specified in Schedule

1 . I / We* ...hereby apply for licence to sell by wholsesale/retail drugs

specified in Schedules C and C(1) excluding those specified in Schedule X *and/or drugs other than those specified in Schedules C, C(1) and X to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945
*and also to operate a pharmacy on the premises situated at...
2. ** The sale and dispensing of drugs will be made under the personal supervision of the registered pharmacists namely:- (Name) ... (Qualification)...
(Name) ...(Qualification)...
3. Categories of drugs to be sold ...
4.*** Particulars of special storage accommodation ...

5. A fee of rupees ... has been credited to the Government account under the head of account ...
Date... Signature ... ]

* Delete whichever is not applicable.
** To be deleted if drugs will be sold only by wholesale.
***Required only if products requiring special storage are to be sold.

FORM 19A [See rule 59 (2)]

Application for the grant or renewal of a restricted 1[licence to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] drugs by retail by 2[***] dealers who do not engage the services of a registered pharmacist
1. I/We ... of. ...hereby apply for a licence to sell by retail (i) 3[Drugs other than those specified in Schedule C, C1 and X] on the premises situated at.../2[***] or (ii) 4 [Drugs specified in Schedule C(1)] on the premises situated at .../ 4[Drugs specified in Schedule C(1)] as vendor in the area...
2. Sales shall be restricted to such drugs as can be sold without the supervision of a registered pharmacist under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules.
3. Names or classes of drugs proposed to be sold ...
*4. Particulars of the storage accommodation for the storage of 5[Schedule C(1)] on the premises referred to above.
**5. The drugs for sale will be purchased from the following dealers and such other dealers as may be endorsed on the licence by the Licensing Authority from time to time.
Name of the dealers...Licence No...

6. A fee of rupees 2[***]/#twenty has been credited to Government under the head of account...

Date... Signature ...

*Delete whichever is not required.
**Applies only to an itinerant vendor.

# Rupees five for itinerant vendors and applicant from a village or town having a population of 5000 or less, and rupees twenty for other restricted licence.

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E) ,dt. 10.10.1985.
2. Omitted by. G. S. R. 231(E) , dt. 4.6.1996.
4. Subs. by.G.S.R. 487(E) , dt. 2.7.1984.
1[FORM 19AA

(See rule 62C)

Application for grant or renewal of a 2[licence to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale by wholesale, or distribute] drugs from a motor vehicle I / W e * of hereby apply for 2[licence to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale by wholesale, or distribute] drugs specified in Schedules C and C (1) and /or drugs other than those specified in Schedules C and C (1) from the vehicle bearing registration no._ assigned under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939.

2. Categories of drugs to be sold / distributed

3. A fee of rupees has been credited to Government under the head of account

*4.Particulars of the storage accommodation for the storage of drugs specified in Schedules C and C (1) on the vehicle referred to above.

Date

Signature

*Delete if not required.
1. Ins. by. G.S.R. 42 (E), dt. 25.1.1979.
2. Subs. by.G.S.R. 788(E), dt. 10.10.1985.

FORM 19B (See rule 67A) Application for 1[licence to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] Homoeopathic medicines 1 . I / We* ... of... hereby apply for a licence to sell by

*wholesale/*retail Homoeopathic medicines on the premises situated at ...

**2. The sale and dispensing of Homoeopathic medicines shall be made under the personal supervision of the following competent person in -charge.
Name ...
3 . A f ee o f rup e e s ...has been credited to Government under the head of account...
Date... Signature ...
*Delete whichever is not required.
** To be deleted if Homoeopathic medicines will be sold by wholesale.

1. Subs. By G.S.R. 788(E), dt.10.10.1985.

1[FORM 19C

[See rule 59(2)]

Application for grant or renewal of a 2[licence to sell, stock, exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] of drugs specified in Schedule .

1. I/We* ... of...hereby apply for a licence to sell by *wholesale/*retail drugs specified in Schedule X to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules,
1945. We operate a pharmacy on the premises, situated at ...

2. ** The sale and dispensing of drugs will be made under the personal supervision of the registered pharmacists mentioned below:- (Name) ... (Qualification) (Name) ...(Qualification)
3. Name of drugs to be sold.
4. *** Particulars of storage accommodation.

5. A fee of rupees ... has been credited to Government account under the head of account ...
Date ... Signature ...

* Delete whichever is not applicable.
** To be deleted if drugs will be sold only by wholesale.
***Required only if products requiring special storage are to be sold.]

FORM 20 [See rule 61(1)]

1[Licence to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] drugs by retail other than those specified in 2[Schedules C, C(1) and X]
1. ... is hereby 1[licensed to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] by retail drugs other than those specified in 2[Schedules C, C (1) and X] of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules 1945, *and to operate a pharmacy on the premises situated

at... subject to the conditions specified below and to provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules thereunder.
2 The licence shall be in force from ... to ...
3. Name (s) of qualified person (s) in charge ...

4. Categories of drugs...

Name of the dealer...Licence No...

Date... Licensing Authority ... ...
* Delete whichever is applicable

Conditions of Licence

1. This licence shall be displayed in a prominent place in a part of the premises open to the public.

2. The licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules thereunder for the time being in force.
3. The licensee shall report to the Licensing Authority any change in the qualified staff in charge within one month of such change.

4. No drug shall be sold unless such drug is purchased under cash or credit memo from a duly licensed dealer or a duly licensed manufacturer.
5. The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the Licensing Authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.

_

2. Subs. by.G.S.R. 462(E), dt. 22.6.1982

FORM 20A [See rule 61 (1)]

Restricted 1[Licence to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] drugs by retail other than those specified in 2 [Schedules C, C (1) and X] for 3[***] dealers who do not engage the services of a registered pharmacist

1. ...is hereby 1[licensed to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or Distribute] on the premises situated at 3[***] ...the following drugs being drugs other than those specified in 2[Schedules C, C (1) and X] of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945, subject to the conditions specified below and to the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules made thereunder.

2. The licence shall be in force from ... to ...
3 The licensee can deal only in such drugs as can be sold without the supervision of qualified person under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.

4 [***]

Name of the dealer ...
Licence No ...
Date...
Licensing Authority

Conditions of Licence

1. This licence shall be displayed in a prominent place in a part of the premises open to the public. 3[***].
2. The licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules thereunder for the time being in force.

3. No drug shall be sold unless such drug is purchased under a cash or credit memo from a duly licensed dealer or a duly licensed manufacturer.
4. The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence h as been taken from the Licensing Authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.

1. Subs. by.G.S.R. 788(E), dt. 10.10.1985
3. Omitted by G.S.R. 231 (E) , dt. 4.6.1996 4 Sl. No. 4 omitted by G.S.R. 504(E) dt. 18.7.2002.

FORM 20B [See rule 61 (1)] 1[Licence to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] by wholesale, drugs other than those specified in 2[Schedules C, C(I) and X] 1 ... is hereby 1[licensed to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] by wholesale drugs other than those specified in 2[Schedules C, C(1) and X] on the premises situated at ... subject to the conditions specified below and to the

provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, and the Rules thereunder.
2. The licence shall be in force from ...to ...

Date... Licence No...
Licensing Authority.
Conditions of Licence
1. This licence shall be displayed in a prominent place in part of the premises open to the public.
2. The licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules thereunder for the time being in force.

3 [3 (i) No drug shall be sold unless such drug is purchased under a cash or credit memo from a duly licensed dealer or a duly licensed manufacturer.
(ii) No sale of any drug shall be made to a person not holding the requisite 1[licence to sell, stock or exhibit for sale, or distribute] the drug. Provided that this condition shall not apply to the sale of any drug to—

(a) an officer or authority purchasing on behalf of Government, or

(b) a hospital, medical, educational or research institution or a registered medical practitioner for the purpose of supply to his patients, or 4[(c) a manufacturer of beverages, confectionery biscuits and other non-medicinal products, where such drugs are required for processing these products.] 5[***]

The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the Licensing Authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.

1. Subs. by.G.S.R. 788(E), dt. 10.10.1985.
2. Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E) , dt. 22.6.1982.
3. Subs. by Notfn. No. F. 1/63/61-D, dt. 17.7.1963.
4.Ins. by S.O.23, dt:23.12.1969.
5.Clause 4 ommited by S.O. 289, dt:20.12.1992. Earlier clause 4 added by Notfn. F. No. 1-113/69-D, dt. 23.12.1969.

1[FORM 20BB

(See rule 62-D) 2[Licence to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale by wholesale, or distribute] drugs other than those specified in Schedule C and Schedule C (1) to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 from a motor vehicle

1 . ... ... ... ... i s h e r e b y 2[l i c e n s e d to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale by wholesale, or distribute] drugs other than those specified in Schedule C and Schedule C(1) from the vehicle bearing registration no. assigned under under Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, subject to the conditions specified below and to the

provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules made thereunder.
2. The licence shall be in force from to

3. Categories of drugs ...

Date:... Licence No...
Licensing Authority.

Conditions of Licence
1. This licence shall be displayed in a prominent place on the vehicle.
2. The licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules made thereunder for the time being in force.

(i) No drugs shall be sold by wholesale or distributed unless such drug is purchased under a cash or credit memo from a duly licensed dealer or a duly licensed manufacturer.

(ii) No sale by wholesale or distribution of any drug shall be made to a person not holding the requisite 2[licensed to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale by wholesale, or distribute] the drug:

Provided that this condition shall not apply to the sale of any drug to— ( a) an officer or authority purchasing on behalf of the Government, or ( b) a hospital, medical, educational or research institution or a registered medical practitioner for the purpose of supply to his patients, or

(c) a manufacturer of beverages, confectionery, biscuits and other non-medical products, where such drugs are required for processing these products.
4. The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing in the event of change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the Licensing Authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.

5. The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing in the event of any change in ownership of the vehicle specified in this licence within seven days of such change.
_

1. Added by Notfn. No. X. 11013/7/76-D&MS (G.S.R. 42(E)), dt. 25.1.1979.
2. Subs. by G.S.R .788(E), dt.10.10.1985

1 [FORM 20-C

(See rule 67-C) 2[Licence to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] Homoeopathic medicines by retail
1. ...is hereby 2[l i c e n s e d to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale by wholesale, or distribute]by retail Homoeopathic medicines on the premises situated at ...subject to the conditions specified below and to the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules made thereunder.

2. The licence shall be in force from ... to ...
3. Name of the competent person in-charge.

Date... Licensing Authority

Conditions of Licence

1. The licence shall be displayed in a prominent place in a part of the premises open to the public.
2. The licensee shall comply with the provisions applicable to homoeopathic

medicines under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules made thereunder for the time being in force.

3. The licensee shall report to the Licensing Authority any change in the competent staff within one month of such change.

3[4. This licence authorises the sale of Homoeopathic medicines made from one earlier potency up to a quantity of 30 ml at a time.] 4[5. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, a licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing about the same and the current licence shall be valid only for a period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, name of the firm with the changed constitution.]

1. Added by Notfn. No. F. 1-35/64-D (G.S.R. 1185), dt. 18.8.1964.
2. Subs. by.G.S.R. 788(E), dt. 10.10.1985.
3. Added by.Notfn. No. F. 1-59/68-D (S.O. 4816), dt. 19.11.1969.
4. Added. G.S.R. 665, dt. 28-5-1977.

1[FORM 20D

(See rule 67C)

2[Licence to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] Homoeopathic medicines by wholesale
1. ... is hereby 2[licensed to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] by wholesale Homoeopathic medicines on the premises situated at...subject to the conditions specified below and to the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act,. 1940 and the Rules made thereunder.

2. The licence shall be in force from ...to...

Date... Licensing Authority.
Conditions of Licence
1. This licence shall be displayed in a prominent place on the premises.

2. The licensee shall comply with the provisions as applicable to Homoeopathic medicines under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules made thereunder for the time being in force.
3. No sale of any drug shall be made to a person not holding the requisite 2[l i c e n s e d to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] the drug. Provided that this conditions hall not apply to the sale of any drug to (a) an authority purchasing on behalf of Government, or (b) a hospital, medical, educational or research institute or a Homoeopathic medical practitioner for the purpose of supply to his patients.
3[4 The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence and the current licence shall be valid only for a period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the Licensing Authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.]

_

1. Added by Notfn. No. F.1-35/64-D, dt. 18.8.1964.
2. Subs. by.G.S.R. 788(E), dt. 10.10.1985.
3. Added by G.S.R. 665, date 28.5.1977.

1 [FORM 20E

(See rule 67 EE) Certificate of renewal of 2[Licence to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] Homoeopathic medicines
1. Number of licence and date of issue ...
Certified that licence no ... in Form 20C / 20D granted on the ... to...
for sale of Homoeopathic medicines at the premises situated at ...has been renewed for a period from ... to ...
2. Name of competent persons in-charge.

Date... Licensing Authority.

1. Added by Notfn. No. F. 1-14/67-D, dt. 3.2.1969.
2. Subs. by G.S.R. 788 (E), dt. 10.10.1985

1[FORM 20F [See rule 61(3)]

Licence to sell, stock or exhibit for sale or distribute by retail drugs specified in Schedule X

1. ...is hereby licensed to sell, stock or exhibit for sale or distribute by retail drugs specified in Schedule X to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 on the premises situated at...

2. Names of drugs.
3. This licence shall be in force from... ...to...
4. Name(s) of registered pharmacist in-charge.
5. The licence is subject to the conditions stated below and the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules made thereunder.

Date:...
Licence No...
Licensing Authority...

Conditions of Licence

1. This licence shall be displayed in a prominent place in a part of the premises open to the public.

2. The licensee shall report to the licensing authority any change in the qualified staff in charge within one month of such change.

3. No drug shall be stocked or sold unless such drug has been purchased under cash/credit memo from a duly licensed dealer or a duly licensed manufacturer.
4. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the licensing authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.
.

1. Ins. by G.S. R. 462(E) , dt. 22.6.1982 corrected vide corrigendum G.S.R. 373(E) , dt. 2.5.1983.

1 [FORM 20G [See rule 61(3)]

2[Licence to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] by wholesale drugs specified in Schedule X

1. ...is hereby 2[licensed to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] by wholesale drugs specified in Schedule X to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 on the premises situated at...
2. Names of drugs...

3. This licence shall be in force from... to ...
4. The licence is subject to the conditions stated below and the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules made thereunder.
Date:...
Licence No...
Licensing Authority...

Conditions of license
1. This licence shall be displayed in a prominent place in a part of the premises open to the public.

2. The licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the rules made thereunder.

3. No drug shall be stocked or sold unless such drug has been purchased under a cash or credit memo from a duly licensed dealer or a duly licensed manufacturer.

4. The licensee shall forward to the licensing authority copies of the invoices of sales made to the retail dealers.
5. No sale of any drug by wholesale shall be made to a person not possessing the requisite 2 [licence to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] drugs specified in Schedule X :

Provided that this condition shall not apply to the sale of any drug to - (a) an officer or authority purchasing on behalf of Government;
(b) a hospital, medical, educational or research institution, nursing home, Registered Medical Practitioner for the purpose of supply to its/his patients or manufacturer holding a licence in Form 25-E or 28-B to manufacture the drugs containing drugs included in Schedule X.
3 [The licensee shall inform the licensing authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence, where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the licensing authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.]]

1. Ins. by. G..S. R. 462(E) , dt. 22.6.1982.
2. Ins. by. G.S..R. 788(E) , dt. 10.10.1985.
3. Ins. by 370(E), dt. 7.4.1994.

FORM 21 [See rule 61 (2)] 1[Licence to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale,or distribute] by retail drugs specified in Schedules C and C (1) 2[excluding those specified in Schedule X]

3[1... is hereby 1[licensed to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] by retail the following categories of drugs specified in Schedules C and C (1) 2[excluding those specified in Schedule X] to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 19454 and to operate a pharmacy on the premises situated at ... subject to the conditions specified below and to the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules thereunder.]
2. The licence shall be in force from ...to ...
3. Name(s) of registered pharmacists in charge ...
3[4. Categories of drugs ...]

Date...
Licence No ...
Licensing Authority

*Delete if not applicable.

Conditions of License

1. This licence shall be displayed in a prominent place in a part of the premises open to the public.

2. The licensee shall report to the Licensing Authority any change in the qualified staff in charge within one month of such change.
4 [***]

4. If the licensee wants to sell, stock or exhibit for sale, or distribute, during the currency of the licence, additional categories of drugs listed in Schedules C and C(I) 2[excluding those specified in Schedule X] but not included in this licence, he should apply to the Licensing Authority for the necessary permission. This licence will be deemed to extend to the categories of drugs in respect of which such permission is given. This permission shall be endorsed on the licence by the Licensing Authority.
5 [5. No drug shall be sold unless such drug is purchased under a cash or credit memo from a duly licensed dealer or a duly licensed manufacturer.]
6. The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place, unless in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the Licensing Authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.

1. Subs. by G.S.R.788(E), dt. 10.10.1985.
3. Amended by. S.O. 2139 ,dt. 12-8-1972.
4. Omitted by. G.S.R. 17(E) , dt. 7.1.1986.
5. Inerted. by Notfn. No. F. 1-63/61, dt. 17.7.1963

FORM 21A [See rule 61 (2)]

1[Licence to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] by retail drugs specified in 2[Schedule C (1)] 3[excluding those specified in Schedule X] 4[***] for dealers who do not engage the services of a registered pharmacist
1. ...is hereby 1[licensed to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] by retail on the premises situated at 4[***] the following drugs being drugs specified in 2[Schedule C (1)] 3[excluding those specified in Schedule X] to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945, subject to the conditions specified below and to the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules thereunder.

2. The licence will be in force from... .

3. Particulars of 2[Schedule C (1)] 3[excluding those specified in Schedule X] drugs to be sold.

5 [***]

Name of dealer(s)...
Licence No...
Date ...
Licensing Authority

Conditions of Licence.

1. This licence shall be displayed in a prominent and conspicuous place in a part of the premises open to the public 6[***]

7[***]

3. The licensee shall deal only in such drugs as can be sold without the supervision of a "qualified person" as defined in the Explanation to sub-rule (15) of rule 65 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.
4. No drug shall be sold unless such drug is purchased under cash or credit memo from duly licensed manufacturer.
5. The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the Licensing Authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.

1 Subs. by G.S.R.788(E), dt. 10.10.1985.
2 Ins. By S.O. 1458, dt:27.4.1965.
4. Amended. by G.S.R 487(E), dt. 2.7.1984.
5. Item 4 omitted G.S.R. 504(E), dt. 18.7.2002
6. Certain words omitted by G.S.R. 231 (E), dt. 4.6.1996
7. Condition No. 2 omitted by G.S.R. 17 (E), dt:7.1.1986.

FORM 21B [See rule 61(2)] 1[Licence to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] by wholesale drugs specified in Schedules C and C (1) 2[excluding those specified in Schedule X
1. ...is hereby 1[licensed to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] by wholesale on the premises situated at the following categories of drugs specified in Schedule. C and C (1) 2 [excluding those specified in Schedule X] to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.
Categories of drugs
2. This licence shall be in force from ... to...
3[2A. The sale shall be made under the personal supervision of a competent person.
(Name of the competent person)].
3. This licence is subject to the conditions stated below and to the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the rules thereunder.

Licence No ...
Date... Licensing Authority.
Conditions of Licence

1. This licence shall be displayed in a prominent place in a part of the premises open to the public.
4[2.***]

3. If the licensee wants to sell, stock or exhibit for sale or distribute during the currency of the licence additional categories of drugs listed in Schedules C and C (1) 2[excluding those specified in Schedule X] but not included in this licence, he should apply to the Licensing Authority for the necessary permission. This licence will be deemed to extend to the categories of drugs in respect of which such permission is given. This permission shall be endorsed on the licence by the Licensing Authority.
5 [4. (i) No drug shall be sold unless such drug is purchased under a cash or credit memo from a duly licensed dealer or a duly licensed manufacturer.
(ii) No sale of any drug shall be made for purposes of resale to a person not holding the requisite licence to sell, stock or exhibit for sale or distribute the drug:
Provided that this condition shall not apply to the sale of any drug to — (a) an officer or authority purchasing on behalf of Government, or (b) a hospital, medical, educational or research institute or a registered medical practitioner for the purpose of supply to his patients, or

6[(c) a manufacturer of hydrogenated vegetable oils, beverages, confectionary and other non-medicinal products, where such drugs are required for processing these products.] 7[5.***] 8[6. The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from Licensing Authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.

1. Subs. by. G.S.R.788(E), dt. 10.10.1985.
2. Subs. by.G.S.R.462(E), dt. 22.6.1982
3. Ins. by.G.S.R. 681(E), dt. 6.6.1988.
4. Condition no. 2 omitted by.G.S.R. 17(E), dt. 7.1.1986 5 Added by. Notfn. No. F. 1-63/61 -D, dt. 17.7.1963.
6.Added by Notfn. No. F. 1-113/69-D, dt. 23.12.1969.
7. Condition 5 omitted by S.O. 289, dt 20.12.1973 (w.e.f. 3.2.1973)
8. Ins. By S.O. 1458, dt:27.4.1965.

1[FORM 21BB [See Rule 62D]

Licence to sell by wholesale or to distribute drugs specified in Schedule C and Schedule C (1) to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 from a motor vehicle.

1. ... is hereby licensed to sell by wholesale, or to distribute drugs specified in Schedule C and Schedule C(1) from the vehicle bearing registration no.
... assigned under Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, subject to the conditions specified below and to the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules made thereunder.
2. The licence shall be in force from ... to ...
3. Categories of drugs ...
Date ... Licence No...
Licensing Authority...
Conditions of licence
1. This licence shall be displayed in a prominent place on the vehicle.

2. No drugs to which this licence applies shall be sold by wholesale or distributed unless the precautions as are published by the Licensing Authority from time to time in the Official Gazette have been observed throughout the period during which it has been in the possession of the licensee.
3. If the licensee wants to sell by wholesale or distribute during the currency of the licence, additional categories of drugs listed in Schedules C and C (1) not included in this licence, he shall apply to the Licensing Authority for necessary permission.
This licence shall be deemed to extend to the categories of drugs in respect of which such permission is given. This shall be endorsed on the licence by the Licensing Authority.

4. (i) No drugs shall be sold by wholesale or distributed unless such drug is purchased under a cash or credit memo from a duly licensed manufacturer.
(ii) No sale for wholesale or distribution of any drug shall be made for the purpose of resale to a person, not holding the requisite licence to sell, stock or exhibit for sale or distribute the drug:
Provided that this condition shall not apply to the sale of any drug to— (a) an officer or authority purchasing on behalf of the Government, or

(b) a hospital, medical, educational or research institution or a registered medical practitioner for the purpose of supply to his patients, or (c) a manufactures of hydrogenated vegetable oils, beverages, confectionery and other non-medical products, where such drugs are required for processing their products.
5. The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the Licensing Authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.
6. The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing in the event of any change in the ownership of the vehicle specified in this licence within seven days of such change.]

1. Added by Notfn. No. 11013/7/76DSMS (G.S.R. 42(E), dt. 25.1.1979.

FORM 21C (See rule 63A) Certificate of renewal of 1[licence to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] drugs Number of licence and date of issue...
1. Certified that licence No ... in 2[Form 20, 20A, 20B, 20F, 20G, 21, 21A or 21B], granted on the...to ... for sale of the following drugs at the premises situated at... has been renewed for a period from ...to ...
2. Categories or particulars of drugs ...
3. Name (s) of registered pharmacist(s) in-charge...

Date... Licensing Authority.

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E),dt. 10.10.1985.
2. Subs. by .S.R. 462(E),dt. 22.6.1982.

1[FORM 21CC (See rule 63B) Certificate of renewal of 2[licence to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale by wholesale, or distribute] drugs from a motor vehicle Number of licence and date of issue...
1. Certified that licence no...in Form 20-BB or Form 21-BB granted on the ...to...for sale by wholesale or distribution of the following drugs from the vehicle bearing registration No... assigned under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 has been renewed for a period from...to ...

2. Categories of the drugs:
...
...

Date... Licensing Authority.

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dt.10.10.1985.
2. Added by Notfn. No. 11013/7/76DSMS (G.S.R. 42(E), dt. 25.1.1979.

FORM 22 (See rule 67)

(Omitted by S.O. 289, dt. 20.12.1972)

FORM 23 (See rule 67)

(Omitted by S.O. 289, dt. 20.12.1972)

FORM 24 (See rule 69) Application for the grant of or renewal of a 1[licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution] of drugs other than those specified in 2[Schedules C and C (1) and X]

1 . I / We ...of. ... hereby apply for the grant / renewal of a licence to manufacture on the premises situated at ... the following drugs being drugs other than those specified in 2[Schedules C and C (1) and X] of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.
2. Names of drugs categorized according to Schedule M.

3. Names, qualifications and experience of technical staff employed for manufacture and testing.
4. A fee of rupees ... has been credited to Government under the head of account ...
Date... Signature ...

Note: The application should be accompanied by a plan of the premises.
1. Subs. by. G.S.R. 788(E), dt. 10.10.1985.
FORM 24A

(See rule 69A)

Application for grant or renewal of a loan 1[licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution] of drugs other than those specified in 2[Schedules C and C (I) and X]

1 . I /We*...of# ...hereby apply

for the grant/renewal of a loan licence to manufacture on the premises situated at...
C/o§ ...
the undermentioned drugs, other than those specified in 2 [Schedules C and C(1) and X] to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.

Names of drugs (each substance to be separately specified).
2. The names, qualifications and experience of the expert staff actually connected with the manufacture and testing of the specified products in manufacturing premises.

3. I/We enclose–

(a) A t ru e c o p y of a let t e r fr om m e /u s to the m a nufac t u r i n g c o nce r n wh os e manufacturing capacity is intended to be utilized by me/us.

(b) A true copy of a letter from the manufacturing concern that they agree to lend the services of their expert staff, equipment and premises for the manufacture of each item required by me/us and that they will analyse every batch of finished product and maintain the registers of raw materials, finished products and reports of analysis separately in this behalf.

(c) Specimens of labels, cartons of the products proposed to be manufactured.

4. A fee of rupees...has been credited to

Government under the head of account ...

Date... Signature ...

* Enter here the name of the proprietor, partners of Managing Director as the case may be.
#Enter here the name of the applicant firm and the address of the principal place of business.
§ Enter here the name and address of the manufacturing concern where the manufacture will be actually carried out and also the Licence number under which the latter operates.

1[FORM 24B

(See rule 69A) Application for grant or renewal of licence to repack for sale or distribution of drugs, being drugs other than those specified in Schedules C and C (1) 2[excluding those specified in Schedule X]

1 . 1 / We ...of...hereby apply for grant/renewal of a licence to repack the following drugs at the premises situated at...
2. Names of the drugs to be repacked ... ...
3. Name, qualification and experience of competent staff ...

4. A fee of rupees ... ... h as been cr edit ed to Gover n m e nt under the h e a d o f account ... ...
Date... Signature of applicant.
NOTE :—The application shall be accompanied by a plan of the premises.

1. Ins. By S.O. 1196, dt:6.5.1960.

1 [FORM 24C (See rule 85B)

Application for the grant or renewal of a 2[licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution of] Homoeopathic medicines or a licence to manufacture potentised preparations from back potencies by licensees holding licence in Form 20C

3 [ 1 . I / W e * ... of ... holder of licence

no ... in Form 20-C hereby apply for the grant/renewal of licence to manufacture the undermentioned Homoeopathic mother tinctures/potentised preparations on the premises situated at... ...

Name of the Homoeopathic preparations ... ... ...
( E a c h i t e m t o b e separately specified)].

2. Names, qualifications and experience of technical staff employed for manufacture and testing of Homoeopathic medicines.
3. A fee of rupees ... has been credited to Government under head of account ...

Date... Signature...

Note 1. Delete whichever portion is not applicable.
2. The application should be accompanied by a plan of the premises.

1. Amended by Notfn. No. F. 1-598-D, dt. 19.11.1969
2. Subs. by. G.S.R.788(E) dt. 10.10.1985.
3. Subs. by. G.S.R. 13(E) dt. 7.1.1983.

1 [FORM 24D (See rule 153) Application for the grant / renewal of a licence to manufacture for sale of Ayurvedic/ Siddha or Unani drugs

1 . I / W e ... of...hereby apply for the grant / renewal of a licence to manufacture Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs on the premises situated at... ...

2. Names of drugs to be manufactured (with details)

3. Names, qualifications and experience of technical staff employed for manufacture and testing of Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs ...
4. A fee of rupees ... has been credited to the Government under the head of account ... and the relevant Treasury Challan is enclosed herewith.
Date... Signature ...
(applicant)

Note—The application should be accompanied by a Plan of the premises.]

1. Added by Notfn. No. 1-23/67-D,dt. 2.2.1970.

1[FORM 24E

(See rule 154A)

Application for grant or renewal of a loan licence to manufacture for sale Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani Drugs
1. I / We* ...of**... hereby apply for the grant / renewal of a loan licence to manufacture Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani Drugs on the premises situated at...
C/o*** ...
2. Names of drugs to be manufactured (with details).

3. The names, qualifications and experience of technical staff actually connected with the manufacture and testing of Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs in the manufacturing premises.
4. I / We* enclose,

(a) A true copy of a letter from me/us to the manufacturing concern whose manufacturing capacity is intended to be utilized by me / us.
(b) A true copy of a letter from the manufacturing concern that they agree to lend the services of their competent technical staff, equipment and premises for the manufacture of each item required by me/us and that they shall maintain the registers of raw materials and finished products separately in this behalf.

(c) Specimen of labels, cartons of the drugs proposed to be manufactured.

5. A fee of Rs ... has been credited to Government under t h e h e ad o f a c c o un t ... and the relevant Treasury Challan is enclosed herewith.

Date ... Signature ... ...] (applicant)

* Enter here the name of the proprietor, partners or Managing Director as the case may be.

**Enter here the name of the applicant firm and the address of the principal place of business.
*** Enter here the name and address of the manufacturing concern where the manufacture will be actually carried out and also the licence number under which the letter operates.

1. Added by G.S.R. 376 (E), dt. 20.7.1978.

1 [FORM 24F (See rule 69) Application for the grant or renewal of a 2[licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution of] drugs specified in Schedule X and not specified in Schedules C and C(1)

1. I/We ... of ...hereby apply for the grant/renewal of licence to manufacture on premises situated at ... the undermentioned drugs, specified in Schedule X to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.
2. Names of drugs.

3. Names, qualifications and experience of technical staff employed for manufacture and testing.
4. A fee of rupees... has been credited to Government account under the head of account...
Signature ... ...
Date:... Designation ... ...]

1. Subs. by .G.S.R. 462(E) ,dt. 22.6.1982.
2. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E) dt. 10.10.1985.

FORM 25 (See rule 70)

1[Licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution of] drugs other than those specified in 2[Schedules C and C(1) and X]

Number of Licence and date of issue ...

1 ... is hereby licensed to manufacture the following categories of drugs being drugs other than those specified in 2[Schedules C and C (1) and X] to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945, on the premises situated at... under the direction and supervision of the following 3[competent technical staff]:
(a) 3[Competent technical staff]. (Names)...
(b) Names of Drugs (each item to be separately specified)...
2. The licence authorises the sale by way of wholesale dealing and storage for sale by the licensee of the drugs manufactured under the licence, subject to the conditions applicable to licence for sale.

3. The licence shall be in force from... to ...

4. The licence is subject to the conditions stated below and to such other conditions as may be specified in the Rules for the time being in force under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

Date ...

*Delete whichever is not applicable.

Signature ...
Designation ...
4[*Licensing Authority/
*Central Licence Appoving Authority.]

Conditions of Licence

1. This licence and any certificate of renewal in force shall be kept on the approved premises and shall be produced at the request of an Inspector appointed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

2. Any change in the expert staff named in the licence shall be forthwith reported to the Licensing Authority.
3. If the licensee wants to manufacture for sale additional items of drugs not included above he should apply to the Licensing Authority for the necessary endorsement as provided in Rule 69(5). This licence will be deemed to extend to the categories so endorsed.

4. The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the Licensing Authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.
_

1. Subs. by. G.S.R. 788(E) ,dt. 10.10.1985
3. Subs. by G.S.R. 231(E), dt. 4.6..1996.
4 Subs. by G.S.R. 923(E), dt. 14.12.1992.

FORM 25A (See rule 70A) Loan 1[licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution of] drugs other than those specified In 2[Schedules C and C (1) and X]

1. Number of licence and date of issue ...

2... of ... is hereby granted a loan licence to manufacture the following drugs other than those specified in 2[Schedules C and C(1) and X] t o t h e Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945, on the premises situated at C/o under the direction and supervision of the following 3[competent technical staff]:
(a) 3[competent technical staff] (Names):...
(c) Names of drugs ...

3. The licence authorises the sale by way of wholesale dealing and storage for sale by the licensee of the drugs manufactured under the licence subject to the conditions applicable to licences for sale.

4. The licence is subject to the conditions stated below and to such other conditions as may be specified in the Rules for the time being in force under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act,

Date... Signature ...
Designation .. ...

Conditions of Licence
1. This licence and any certificate of renewal in force shall be kept on the approved premises and shall be produced at the request of an Inspector appointed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

2. Any change in the 3[competent technical staff] named in the licence shall be forthwith reported to the Licensing Authority.
3. If the licensee wants to undertake during the currency of the licence the manufacture for of sale additional drugs he should apply to the Licensing Authority for the necessary endorsement to the licence as provided in Rule 69-A. This licence will be deemed to extend to the drugs so endorsed.

4. The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the Licensing Authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E) , dt.10.10.1985.
3. Subs. by. G.S.R. 231(E) ,dt. 4.6.1996.

1[ FORM 25B (See rule 70)

Licence to repack for sale or distribution of drugs being drugs other than those specified in Schedules C and C (1) 2[excluding those specified in Schedule X]

Number of licence and date of issue.
1. ... ... of ...is hereby granted a licence to repack the following drugs for sale or distribution on the premises situated at... under the supervision of the following competent staff.

(a) Names of drugs to be repacked.
(b) Names of competent staff.

2. The licence shall be in force from ... to ...

3. The licence authorises the sale by way of wholesale dealing by the licensee and storage for sale by the licensee of the drugs repacked under the licence subject to conditions applicable to licences for sale.

4. The licence is subject to the conditions stated below and to such other conditions as may be specified in the Rules for the time being in force under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act,

Date... Signature ... ...

Conditions of Licence
1. This licence and any certificate of renewal in force shall be kept on the approved premises and shall be produced at the request of an Inspector appointed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

2. Any change in the expert staff named in the licence shall be forthwith reported to the Licensing Authority.

3. If the licensee wants to repack for sale or distribution additional items he should apply to the Licensing Authority for the necessary endorsement to this licence.
This licence will be deemed to extend to only those items so endorsed.
4. The drugs repacked under this licence shall bear on their label, apart from other particulars required by these Rules, the name and address of the licensee and the number of the licence under which the drug is repacked preceded by the words "Rpg. Lic. No.".

5. The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the Licensing Authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.

1. Added by Notfn. No. F. 1-22/59-D, dt. 9-4-1960.

1[FORM 25C (See rule 85D) 2[Licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution of] Homoeopathic medicines

Number of Licence and date of issue ...
3 [*1. ... of... who holds a licence in Form 20-C is hereby licensed to manufacture undermentioned Homoeopathic Mother Tinctures/ potentised and other preparations on the premises situated at ... under the direction and supervision of the following technical staff:

Names of the Homoeopathic preparations.
(Each item to be separately specified).

Names of the Technical Staff... ]

2. The licence shall be in force from ... to ...

3. The licence is subject to the conditions stated below and to such other conditions as may be specified in the Rules for the time being in force under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act,

Date... Signature...

Designation...

Conditions of Licence
1. This licence and any certificate of renewal in force shall be kept on the approved premises and shall be produced at the request of an Inspector appointed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

2. Any change in the expert staff named in the licence shall be forthwith reported to the Licensing Authority.
4[3. The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the Licensing Authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.]
*Delete the words ―who holds a licence in Form 20C‖ in case this is not applicable.

1. Added by Notfn No. F.1-36/64-D, dt:18.8.1964
2. Subs. by.. G.S.R.788(E) , dt. 10.10.1985.
3. Subs. by. G.S.R. 13(E) , dt. 7.1.1983.
4. Added by S.O. 903, dt. 28.2.1976.
1[FORM 25D (See rule 154)

Licence to manufacture for sale of Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs

No. of Licence...

1. ... ... is / are hereby licensed to manufacture the following Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs on the premises situated at... under the direction and supervision of the following technical staff: —

(a) Technical staff (Names).
(b) Names of drugs (each item to be separately specified).
2. The licence shall be in force from ... to ...
3. The licence is subject to the conditions stated below and to such other conditions as may be specified in the Rules for the time being in force under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

Date of issue: ... Signature ...

Designation ...

Conditions of Licence
1. This licence and any certificate of renewal in force shall be kept on the approved premises and shall be produced at the request of an Inspector appointed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

2. Any change in the Technical staff named in the licence shall be forthwith reported to the Licensing Authority.
3. This licence shall be deemed to extend to such additional items as the licensee may intimate to the Licensing Authority from time to time, and as may be endorsed by the Licensing Authority.

4. The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall be

deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the Licensing Authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.]

1. Added by Notfn. No. 1-23/67 –D (S.O. 642), dt. 2-2-1970.

1 [FORM 25E (See rule 154A)

Loan Licence to manufacture for sale Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani Drugs

1. Number of Licence...

2 ... of. ... is hereby granted a loan licence to manufacture for sale Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs, on the premises situated at ... C/o...under the direction and supervision of the following expert technical staff:
(a) Technical staff (Names)...
(b) Names of drugs (each item to be separately specified)
3. The licence shall be in force from ... to...

4. The licence is subject to the conditions stated below and to such other conditions as may be specified in the Rules for the time being in force under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
Date of Issue...

Conditions of Licence

Signature ...
Designation ...

1. This licence and any certificate of renewal in force shall be kept on the approved premises and shall be produced on the request of an Inspector appointed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

2. Any change in the technical staff named in the licence shall be forthwith reported to the Licensing Authority.
3. This licence shall be deemed to extend to such additional items as the licensee may intimate to the Licensing Authority from time to time, and as may be endorsed by the Licensing Authority.

4. The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the Licensing Authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.

1. Added by G.S.R. 376 (E), dt. 20.7.1978 1 [FORM 25F (See rule 70) 2[Licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution of] drugs specified in Schedule X and not specified in Schedules C and C(I)
1. ... of ...is hereby licensed to manufacture at

the premises situated at...the following drugs specified in Schedule X to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.

2. Names of drugs.
3. Names of approved 3[competent technical staff]

4. The licence authorises the sale by way of wholesale dealing and storage for sale by the licensee of the drugs manufactured under the licence subject to the conditions applicable to licence for sale.
5. The licence shall be in force ... to...

6. The licence is subject to conditions stated below and to other conditions as may be specified in the rules for the time being in force under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, Date of issue... Signature ...

Licence No ... Designation ...
4[*Licensing Authority/Central Licence Approving Authority.]

*Delete whichever portion is not required.

Conditions of Licence

1. The licence and any certificate of renewal in force shall be kept on the licensed premises and shall be produced at the request of an Inspector appointed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

2. If the licensee wishes to undertake during the currency of the licence the manufacture of any drug specified in Schedule X not included above, he should apply to the Licensing Authority for the necessary endorsement of this licence. This licence shall be deemed to extend to only those items so endorsed.
3. Any change in the 3[competent technical staff] shall be forthwith reported to the Licensing Authority.

4. The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the Licensing Authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.

5. The licensee shall furnish to the Licensing Authority copies of the invoices of sales made to dealers.
6. The licensee shall not manufacture drugs covered by this licence for use as 'Physician's Samples'.]

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E) dt. 22.6.1982.
2. Subs. by G.S.R.788(E) dt. 10.10.1985.
3. Subs. by G.S.R.231(E) dt. 4.6.1996.
4. Subs. by G.S.R. 923(E) dt. 14.2.1992.
1 [FORM 26 (See rules 73 and 83)

Certificate of renewal of licence to manufacture for sale of drugs other than those specified in Schedule X
1. Certified that licence No ... granted on the... to ... for the manufacture of the following categories of drugs being
*drugs other than those specified in Schedules C, C (1) and X/*drugs specified by Schedules C and C (1) excluding those specified in Schedule X to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945, at the premises situated at ... has been renewed from... to...
2. Name(s) of approved 2[competent technical staff] ...

3[3 Names of the drugs (each item to be separately specified) ...

Signature ...
Date... Designation ...
4[Licensing Authority/ *Central Licence Approving Authority.]
*Delete whichever portion is not required.]

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E) dt. 22.6.1982.
2. Subs. by G.S.R.231(E) dt. 4.6.1996
3. Ins. By G.S.R. 370(E) dt. 7.4.1994.

1[FORM 26A

(See rules 73A and 83A) Certificate of renewal of loan licence to manufacture for sale of drugs other than those specified in Schedule X

1. Certified that a loan licence No ...granted on the... to... for the manufacture of the
*drugs other than those specified in Schedules C, C (1) and X the undermentioned drugs being drugs specified in Schedules C and C (1) excluding those specified in Schedule X, to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945, at the premises situated at... C/o ...has been renewed from ... to...

2. Names of the drugs (each substance to be separately specified).
3. Names of the approved 2[competent technical staff]

Date ...
Signature...
Designation...]
* Delete whichever is not applicable.

1.Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dt. 22.6.1982.
2. Subs. by G.S.R.231(E) dt. 4.6.1996.

1[FORM 26B

(See rule 73B)

Certificate of renewal of licence to repack for sale or distribution of drugs being drugs other than those specified in Schedules C and C (1) 2[excluding those specified in Schedule X]

1. Certified that licence No ... granted on the...
to...for the repacking of the following drugs at the premises situated at ...has been renewed from ...
to...Names of drugs to be repacked ...

2. Names of competent staff. ...

Date : ... Signature...
Designation...

* Delete whichever is not applicable.] 3[*Licensing Authority.
*Central licence Approving Authority.]

1 Added by Notfn. No. F.1-22/5 9-D, dt. 9.4.1964.
2 Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E) dt. 22.6.1982.
3. Ins. by G.S.R. 923(E) dt. 14.12.1992

FORM 26C (See rule 85G)

Certificate of renewal of licence to manufacture for sale of Homoeopathic medicines

1. Certified that licence No ... granted on the...
to... for the manufacture for sale of the Homoeopathic mother tinctures/potentised preparation at the premises situated at ... has been renewed for a period from the ... to ... ...
2. Name of the technical staff ... ...
1[3. Names of the drugs (each item to be separately specified) ... ]

Date...

Signature ...
Designation .. ...
1. Ins. by G.S.R. 370(E) dt. 7.4.1994.

1[FORM 26D (See rule 155)

Certificate of renewal of licence to manufacture for sale of Ayurvedic / Siddha or Unani drugs

1. Certified that licence No ... granted on the...to Shri/ Messers ... for the manufacture of Ayurvedic/Siddha/Unani drugs at the premises situated at...has been renewed from...to ...

2. Names of technical staff ...
2[3. Names of drugs (each item to be separately specified).]]

Date ... Signature...
Designation...

1. Ins. by F. No.1 -23/67-D, dt. 2-2-1970.
2. Ins. by G.S.R 376 (E), dt. 20.7.1978

1[FORM 26E (See rule 155A) Certificate of renewal of loan licence to manufacture for sale of Ayurvedic / Siddha or Unani Drugs

1. Certified that loan Licence No ...granted on the...to...
for the man ufacture ofAyurvedic/ Siddha or Unani drugs at the premises situated at... C/o ... has been renewed from...to ... ...

2 Names of technical staff.

Date: ... Signature...
Designation...

1. Added by G.S.R. 376(E), dt. 20.7.1978.

1[FORM 26E-I (See rule 157B) Certificate of Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) to manufacture of Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani drugs

Certified that manufacturing unit licensee, namely ... situated at ...
State ... Licence No ... comply with the requirements of Good Manufacturing Practices of Ayurveda-Siddha-Unani drugs as laid down in Schedule T of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.

This certificate is valid for a 2[period of five years and the Good Manufactruing Practices (GMP) is valid for the various dosage forms or Rasaushadhis, as follows:]

Date :... Signature...
Place : .. .. Designation...
Licensing Authority for Ayurveda/ Siddha/ Unani Drugs.]

1.subs. by G.S.R.198(E), dt. 7.3.2003. Earlier Ins. by G.S.R. 561(E), dt. 23.6.2000.
2.Subs. by G.S.R. 376(E), dt. 3.5.2010

1[FORM 26E2-I (See rule 158C) State Drug Controller or Licensing Authority for Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Medicines Name of the State or Union territory...

Free Sale Certificate

It is certified that M/s. ...(Name of the company)...situated at ... (Address) ... is holding valid Ayurvedic/Siddha/Unani Drug Manufacturing License Number... valid till ...and certificate of Good Manufacturing Practices for the State or Union territory of ...The manufacturer has applied for renewal of license on ...(to be mentioned, if application for renewal of license has not been rejected).

It is also certified that the manufacturing plant siuated at ...(Address)...in which the Ayurvedic or Unani or Sidhha products are manufactured, conforms to the requirement of Good Manufacturing Practices and is subjected to inspection as per rules.
The firm has been permitted under License Number...to manufacture and market the following products (attach list of products, if multiple) freely for sale in India under the provisions of the Drugs and Cosemtics Atc, 1940 and the rules thereunder.
(i)...
(ii)...
(iii)...

Date :... (Seal of issuing Officer) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...

( Signature and Name) State Drug Controller/Licensing Authority Address...
Name of State or Union territory...]

1.Ins. by G.S.R. 153 (E), dt. 5.3.2014.

1[FORM 26E2-II (See rule 158C) State Drug Controller or Licensing Authority for Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Medicines Name of the State or Union territory...

Free Sale Certificate

It is certified that M/s. ...(Name of the company)...situated at ... (Address) ... is holding valid Ayurvedic/Siddha/Unani Drug Manufacturing Loan License Number... valid till ...and the valid certificate of Good Manufacturing Practices for the State or Union territory of ...The manufacturer has applied for renewal of loan license on ...(to be mentioned, if application for renewal of license has not been rejected).

It is also certified that the manufacturing plant siuated at ...(Address)...in which the Ayurvedic or Unani or Sidhha products are manufactured, conforms to the requirement of Good Manufacturing Practices and is subjected toinspection as per rules.
The firm has been permitted under Loan License Number...to manufacture and market the following products (attach list of products, if multiple) freely for sale in India under the provisions of the Drugs and Cosemtics Atc, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the rules thereunder.
(i)...
(ii)...
(iii)...

Date :... (Seal of issuing Officer) ... ... ... ... ... ... .
( Signature and Name) State Drug Controller/Licensing Authority Address...
Name of State or Union territory... ]

1.Ins. by G.S.R. 153 (E), dt. 5.3.2014.

1[FORM 26 E3 (See rule 158C) State Drug Controller or Licensing Authority for Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Medicines Name of the State or Union territory...

Non-Conviction Certificate

It is certified that M/s. ...(Name of the company)...situated at ... (Registered Address) ... is holding valid Ayurvedic/Siddha/Unani Drug Manufacturing License Number... in Form 25D/25E valid till ...and certificate of Good

Manufacturing Practices/valid Good Manufacturing Practices certificate of principal or original manufacturer for the State or Union territory of ...The manufacturer has applied for renewal of license on ...(date to be mentioned, if application for renewal of license has not been rejected).

As per the records of the State Drug Controller or Licensing Authority, as it may be, and affidavit (Annexure I) given by the company, the firm has not been conicted under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the rules thereunder in the State or Union territory of ..., during the last three years of the issuing of this certificate.

This certificate shall be valid only for six months from the date of issue.

Date :... (Seal of issuing Officer) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .
( Signature and Name) State Drug Controller/Licensing Authority for Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Medicines.
Address...
Name of State or Union territory...]

1[ANNEXURE-1 (Proforma of Affidavit to be submitted on stamp paper of Rs. 50 attested by Magistrate not below the rank of first class)

I, ...S/O...age...working as ...of...(Name and address of the company)...from ...to...do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as under:

1. That I, in the capacity of Authorized Signnatory of ...(name and address of the company)...,am duly competent to depose and verify the present affidavit.
2. That I apply for Non-conviction Certificate on behalf of M/s. ...
3. Thar I declare that I am aware of the details of my organization asnd day to day activities from...to...
4. That I hereby undertake that the Non-Conviction Certificate, if issued, will be utilized for the bona fide purpose only.
5. I declare that the aforesaid firm is not convicted under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and rules thereunder during the last three years.
6. That it is my true statement.
...
Signatature of Deponent

Verification Verified at...(Palce and State)...today on this...day of...(month)...(Year)...that the contents of the above affidavit are true to my knowledge and belief and no part of it is false and nothing has been concealed therefrom.
...
Signature of Deponent] Witness with Address

1.Ins. by G.S.R. 153 (E), dt. 5.3.2014.

1[FORM 26F (See rules 73 and 83)

Certificate of renewal of licence to manufacture for sale of drugs specified in Schedule X
1. Certified that licence No ... granted on the ... to ...
for the ma nu facture o f drugs sp ec ified in Sc hed u le X to th e Dru g s an d Cosmetics Rules, 1945, at the premises situated at... has been renewed from... to...
2. Names of drugs (each substance to be separately specified).
3. Names of the approved 2[competent technical staff].

Date:...
Date of issue...
Signature...
Designation...
3[*Licensing Authority/Central Licence Approving Authority]

*Delete whichever is not applicable.

1. Ins. by. G.S.R. 462(E) ,dt. 22.6.1982.

1[FORM 26G (See rules 122F) Certificate of renewal of licence to operate a Blood Bank for processing of whole human blood and/or* for preparation for sale or distribution of its components

1. Certified that Licence No ... . granted on ... to M/s...
... for the operation of a Blood Bank for processing of whole human blood and*/or for preparation of its components at the premises situated at... is hereby renewed with effect from... to ...

2. Name(s) of items :

3. Name(s) of competent Technical Staff:

Dated...
Signature...
Designation...
[*Licensing Authority/Central Licence Approving Authority]

* Delete whichever is not applicable.
1. Subs. by G.S.R 245(E) dt. 5.4.1999.

1[FORM 26H

(See rules 68A, 76, 77, 78)

Certificate of renewal of licence to manufacture for sale of 2[Large Volume Parenterals/Sera and Vaccines/recombinant DNA (r-DNA)derived drugs] specified in Schedules C and C(I) excluding those specified in Schedule X

1. Certified that licence No... granted on the ... to ... for the manufacture of following 2[Large Volume Parenterals/Sera and Vaccines/recombinant DNA (r-DNA) derived drugs] at the premises situated at... has been renewed from...to...

Name(s) of drug(s) ... ...
(each item to be separately specified).

3. Name(s) of competent technical staff:
(a) responsible for manufacturing (b) responsible for testing

Date:...
Signature...
Designation...
[*Licensing Authority/Central Licence Approving Authority]
* Delete whichever is not applicable.
Ins. by G.S.R. 119(E), dt. 11.3.1996.
Subs. By G.S.R. 26 (E), dt: 19.1.2006.

1[FORM 26-I (See rules 122-I)

Certificate of renewal of licence for manufacture of blood product.
1. Certified that licence no ... granted on the ... to M/s. ... for the manufacture of blood products at the premises situated at ...is hereby renewed with effect from ... to...

Name(s) of item (s):
Name(s) of competent technical staff:
(a) responsible for manufacturing (b) responsible for testing

Date:...
Signature...
Designation...
[*Licensing Authority/Central Licence Approving Authority] _ * Delete whichever is not applicable.

1. Ins. by G.S.R 245(E), dt. 5.4.1999.
1[FORM 26-J (See rules 122G, 122H, 122I, 122P)

Certificate of renewal of licence for collection, processing, testing, storage, banking and release of umblical cord blood stem cells.
Certified that licence no ... granted on the ... to M/s. ... for collection, processing, testing, storage, banking and release of umblical cord blood stem cells at the premises situated at ...is hereby renewed with effect from ...
to...

1. Name(s) of competent technical staff:
1...
2...
3...

Date:...
Signature...
Designation...
[*Licensing Authority/Central Licence Approving Authority]
* Delete whichever is not applicable.

1. Ins. by G.S.R 899(E), dt. 27.12.2011.

1[FORM 26J (See rules 83A and 83AA)

Certificate of renewal of loan licence to manufacture for sale of Large Volume Parenterals/Sera and Vaccines/recombinant DNA (r-DNA) derived drugs specified in Schedules C and C(I) excluding those specified in Schedule X

Certified that licence no ... granted on the ... to M/s. ... for the manufacture of following Large Volume Parenterals/Sera and Vaccines/recombinant DNA (rDNA) derived drugs at the premises situated at ...has been renewed from ... to...

2. Name(s) of drug (s)...(Each item to be separately specified)

3. Name(s) of competent technical staff:
(a) responsible for manufacturing (b) responsible for testing

Date:...
Signature...
Designation...
[*Licensing Authority/Central Licence Approving Authority]
* Delete whichever is not applicable.

1. Ins. by G.S.R 574(E), dt.17.6.2012.

FORM 27

Application for grant or renewal of a 1[licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution] of drugs specified in Schedules C and C (1) 2[excluding those specified in 3[Part XB and] Schedule X]

1 . I / We ... hereby apply for the grant / renewal of a licence to manufacture on the premises situated at the undermentioned drugs, being drugs specified in Schedules C and C (1) 2[excluding those specified in 3[Part XB and] Schedule X] to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.

Names of drugs...(each item to be separately specified).

2. The names, qualifications and experience of the expert staff responsible for the manufacture and testing of the above mentioned drugs.
(a) Name (s) of staff responsible for test ...
(b) Name (s) of staff responsible for manufacture...

3. The premises and plan are ready for inspection/ will be ready for inspection on...

4. A fee of rupees ... and an inspection fee of rupees ...has been credited to Government under the head of account...
Date ... Signature...
Designation...
Note-The application shall be accompanied by a plan of premises.
_

1. Ins. by. G.S.R. 788(E), dt. 10.10.1985. 3. Ins. by G.S.R. 28(E), dt. 22.1.1993.

FORM 27A

(See rule 75A)

Application for grant or renewal of a loan 1[licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution of] drugs specified in Schedules C and C(1) 2[excluding those specified in Part XB and Schedule X]

1. I / We* ...of# ... ...hereby apply for the grant/ renewal of Loan Licence to manufacture on the premises situated at C/o$... the undermentioned drugs, being drugs specified in Schedules C and C (1) 2[excluding those specified in Part XB and Schedule X] to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules.

Names of drugs (each substance to be separately specified).

2. The names, qualifications and experience of the expert staff actually connected with the manufacture and testing of the specified products in the manufacturing premises.
(a) Name (s) of expert staff responsible for manufacture ...
(b) Name (s) of the expert staff responsible for testing ...

3. I /We enclose:

(a) A true copy of a letter from me / us to manufacturing concern whose manufacturing capacity is intended to be utilized by me / us.
(b) A true copy of a letter from the manufacturing concern that they agree to lend the services of their competent technical staff, equipment and premises for the manufacture of each item required by me / us and that they shall

will analyse every batch of finished product and maintain the registers of raw materials, finished products and reports of analysis separately on this behalf.

(c) Specimens of labels, cartons of the drugs proposed to be manufactured.

4. A fee of Rs ... has been credited to Government under the head of account ... ...

Date ... Signature ... ...
Designation...
* Enter here name of the proprietor, partners or Managing Director, as the case may be.
# Enter here name of the applicant firm and the address of the principal place of business.
$ Enter here the name and address of the manufacturing concern where the manufacture will be actually carried out and also the licence number under which the latter operates.

Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E) ,dt. 10.10.1985.
Ins. By G.S.R. 462(E), dt: 22.6.1982.

1[FORM 27B Application for grant or renewal of a 2[licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution of] drugs specified in Schedules C, C(I) and X

1. I/We ... of ... hereby apply for the grant/renewal of a licence to manufacture on the premises situated at... the undermentioned drugs, specified in Schedules C, C(I) and X to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.

2. Names of drugs.

3. The names, qualifications and experience of the expert staff responsible for the manufacture and testing of the abovementioned drugs.

(a) Name(s) of staff responsible for testing:

(b) Name(s) of staff responsible for manufacture:

4. The premises and plant* are ready for inspection/will be ready for inspection on ...

5. A fee of rupees ... and an inspection fee of rupees ... has been credited to the Government under the head of account ...

Date... Signature...

Note: The application shall be accompanied by a plan of the premises.]

* Delete whichever is not applicable.

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E) dt. 22.6.1982.
2. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E) ,dt. 10.10.1985.

1[FORM 27C

(See rule 122-F)

Application for grant/renewal* of licence for the operation of a Blood Bank for processing of whole blood and/or* preparation of Blood Components
1. I/We, ... of M/s ... hereby apply for the grant of licence/renewal of licence number ... dated...to operate a Blood Bank, for processing of whole blood and/or* for preparation of its components on the premises situated at ...

2. Name(s) of the item(s)

3. The name(s), qualification and experience of competent Technical Staff are as under:
(a) Name(s) of Medical Officer.
(b) Name(s) of Technical Supervisor (c) Name(s) of Registered Nurse.

(d) Name(s) of Blood Bank Technician.
4. The premises and plant are ready for inspection/will be ready for inspection on... ...

5. A licence fee of rupees ... and an inspection fee of rupees ... has been credited to the Government under the Head of Account... (receipt enclosed)

Signature ... ...
Dated. ... Name and Designation...

* Delete whichever is not applicable.

Notes:

1. The application shall be accompanied by a plan of the premises, list of machinery and equipment for collection, processing, storage and testing of whole blood and its components, memorandum of association/constitution of the firm, copies of certificate relating to educational qualifications and experience of the competent technical staff and documents relating to ownership or tenancy of the premises.
2. A copy of the application together with the relevant enclosures shall also be sent to the Central Licence Approving Authority and to the Zonal/Sub-Zonal Officers concerned of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization].

1[FORM 27D (See rule 75)

Application for grant or renewal of a licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution of 2[Large Volume Parenterals/Sera and Vaccines/recombinant DNA (r-DNA) derived drugs] excluding those specified in Schedule X

1. I/We ... of ...hereby apply for grant/renewal of a licence to manufacture for sale or distribution on the premises situated at...the undermentioned 2[Large Volume Parenterals/Sera and Vaccines/recombinant DNA (r-DNA) derived drugs], specified in Schedules C and C(1) to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.

2. Name(s) of drug(s) ... (each item to be separately specified).

3. The name(s), qualifications and experience of the competent technical staff responsible for the manufacture of the above mentioned drugs.
(a) Name(s) of staff responsible for testing ...
(b) Name(s) of staff responsible for manufacturing ...
4. The premises and plant are ready for inspection/will be ready for inspection on...

5. A fee of rupees ... and an inspection fee of rupees ...has been credited to the Government under the Head of Account...

Date: ... Signature ...
Designation...

Notes:
1. The application is to be accompanied by a plan of the premises, list of machinery and equipment to be employed for manufacture and testing, memorandum of association/constitution of the firm, copies of qualification and experience of competent technical staff and documents relating to ownership or tenancy of the premises.

2. A copy of the application together with the relevant enclosures shall also be sent each to the Central Licence Approving Authority and concerned Zonal/Sub-Zonal Officers of Central Drugs Standard Control Organization].
_

Ins. by. G.S.R.119(E), dt. 11-3-1996.
Subs. By G.S.R.26 (E) dt: 19.1.2006.

1[FORM 27DA (See rule 75A)

Application for grant or renewal of a loan licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution of Large Volume Parenterals/Sera and Vaccines/recombinant DNA (r-DNA) derived drugs excluding those specified in Schedule X

1. I/We* ... of #...hereby apply for grant/renewal of a loan licence to manufacture on the premises situated at c/o@...the undermentioned drugs being Large Volume Parenterals/Sera and Vaccines/recombinant DNA (r-DNA) derived drugs specified in Schedules C, C(1) excluding those specified in Schedule X to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.
2. Name(s) of drug(s) ... (each item to be separately specified).

3. The name(s), qualifications and experience of the competent technical staff responsible for the manufacture of the above mentioned drugs.
(a) Name(s) of competent technical staff responsible for testing ...
(b) Name(s) of competent technical staff responsible for manufacturing ...
4. I /We enclose:

(a) A true copy of a letter from me / us to manufacturing concern whose manufacturing capacity is intended to be utilized by me / us.
(b) A true copy of a letter from the manufacturing concern that they agree to lend the services of their competent technical staff, equipment and premises for the manufacture of each item required by me / us and that they shall will analyse every batch of finished product and maintain the registers of raw materials, finished products and reports of analysis separately on this behalf.

(c) Specimens of labels, cartons of the drugs proposed to be manufactured.

5. A fee of rupees ...has been credited to the Government under the Head of Account...]

Date: ... Signature ...
Designation...

* Enter here name of the proprietor, prtners or managing director, as may be.
# Enter here nam of the applicant firm and the address of the principal place of business.@Enter here the name and address of the manufacturing concern where the manufacture will be actually carried out and also the license number under which the latter operates.
_

Ins. by. G.S.R. 574 (E), dt.07-7-2012.

1[FORM 27E

(See rule 122F)

Application for grant/renewal* of licence to manufacture blood products for sale or distribution
1. I/We ... of M/s ... hereby apply for the grant of licence/renewal of licence number ... dated...
to manufacture Blood products on the premises situated at ... ...

2. Name(s) of the item(s)

3. The name(s), qualification and experience of competent Technical Staff are as under:
(a) responsible for manufacturing (b) responsible for testing
1. 1.
2. 2.
3. 3.

4. The premises and plant are ready for inspection/will be ready for inspection on...
5. A licence fee of rupees ... ... ...and an inspection fee of rupees ... has been credited to the Government under the Head of Account... (receipt enclosed)

Signature ... ...
Dated. ... Name and Designation... ...
* Delete whichever is not applicable.
Notes:

1. The application shall be accompanied by a plan of the premises, list of machinery and equ i pm ent for m a nu fact ure of bl o od pr od u c ts, m e mora nd um o f association/constitution of the firm, copies of certificate relating to educational qualifications and experience of the competent technical staff and documents relating to ownership or tenancy of the said premises.

2. A copy of the application together with the relevant enclosures shall also be sent to the Central Licence Approving Authority and to the Zonal/Sub-Zonal Officers concerned of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization].

1[FORM 27F

(See rule 122F)

Application for grant/renewal* of licence for collection, processing, testing, storage, banking and release of umblical cord blood stem cells
1. I/We ... of M/s ... hereby apply for the grant of licence/renewal* of licence number ... dated...
for collection, processing, testing, storage, banking and release of umblical cord blood stem cells on the premises situated at ... ...

2. Name(s), qualification and experinec of competent technical staff are as under:
1. Medical Director
2.Laboratory In-charge
3.Technical Supervisor
4.Cord Blood Bank Technician (s)

3. The premises and plant are ready for inspection/will be ready for inspection on...
4. A licence fee of rupees ... ... ...and an inspection fee of rupees ...has been credited to the Government under the Head of Account... (receipt enclosed)

Signature ... ...
Dated. ... Name and Designation... ...

* Delete whichever is not applicable.
Notes:
1. The application shall be accompanied by a plan of the premises, list of machinery and equ i pm ent for m a nu fact ure of bl o od pr od u c ts, m e mora nd um o f association/constitution of the firm, copies of certificate relating to educational qualifications and experience of the competent technical staff and documents relating to ownership or tenancy of the said premises.

2. A copy of the application together with the relevant enclosures shall also be sent to the Central Licence Approving Authority and to the Zonal/Sub-Zonal Officers concerned of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization].

FORM 28 (See rule 76) 1[Licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution of] drugs specified in Schedules C and C (1) 2[excluding those specified in Schedule X] Number of Licence and date of issue ...
1. ... is hereby licensed to manufacture at the premises situated at the following drugs, being drugs specified in Schedules C and C (1) 2[excluding those specified in Schedule X] to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.

Names of drugs ...
2. Names of approved 3[competent technical staff].

3. The licence authorises the sale by way of wholesale dealing and storage for sale by the licensee of the drugs manufactured under the licence subject to the conditions applicable to licences for sale.

4. The licence will be in force from ...to ...

5. The licence is subject to the conditions stated below and to such other conditions as may be specified in the Rules for the time being in force under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act,1940.

Date:...
Signature...
Designation...
4[*Licensing Authority/Central Licence Approving Authority]
*Delete whichever is not applicable Conditions of Licence 1 This licence and any certificate of renewal in force shall be kept on the approved premises and shall be produced at the request of an Inspector appointed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

2 If the licensee wants to undertake during the currency of the licence the manufacture any drug specified in Schedules C and C (1) 2[excluding those specified in Schedule X] not included above, he should apply to the Licensing Authority for the necessary endorsement as provided in rule 75(3). This licence will be deemed to extend to the items so endorsed.

3 Any change in the 3[competent technical staff] shall be forthwith reported to the Licensing Authority.

4 The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the Licensing Authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.

FORM 28A (See rule 76-A) Loan 1[Licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution of] drugs specified in Schedules C and C (1) 2[excluding those specified in Schedule X]

1. Number of licence and date of issue ...
2. ... of... ...is hereby granted a loan licence to manufacture on the premises situated at ... C/o ... the following drugs being drugs specified in Schedules C and C (1) 2[excluding those specified in Schedule X] to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.

Names of Drugs ...
3. Names of 3[competent technical staff] ...
4[3A. The licence shall be in force from ... to...

4. The licence authorises the sale by way of wholesale dealing by the licensee and storage for sale by the licensee of the drugs manufactured under the licence subject to the conditions applicable to licence for sale.

5 The licence is subject to the conditions stated below and to such other conditions as may be specified in the Rules for the time being in force under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act,

Date of issue: ...
Signature...
Designation ...
Conditions of Licence
1. This licence and any certificate of renewal in force shall be kept on the approved premises and shall be produced at the request of an Inspector appointed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

2. If the licensee wishes to undertake during the currency of the licence to manufacture any drugs specified in Schedules C and C (1) 2[excluding those specified in Schedule X] not included above, he should apply to the Licensing Authority for the necessary endorsement to the licence as provided in rule 75A. This licence will be deemed to extend to the items so endorsed.
3. Any change in the 3[competenet technical staff] shall be forthwith reported to the Licensing Authority.

4. The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence.
Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the Licensing Authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.

3. Subs. by G.S.R.231(E) dt. 4.6.1996.
4. Added by Notfn. F. No. 1-10/62-D, dated 10.4.1964.

1 [FORM 28B (See rule 76) 2[Licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution of] drugs specified in Schedules C, C(I) and X No of Licence...

1. ... is hereby licensed to manufacture at the premises situated at ... the following drugs specified in Schedules C, C(I) and X to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.

Name of drugs...
2. Names of 3[competent technical staff]

3. The licence authorises the sale by way of wholesale dealing and storage for sale by the licensee of the drugs manufactured under the licence subject to the conditions applicable to licence for sale.

4. The licence will be in force...to ...

5. The licence is subject to conditions stated below and to other conditions as may be specified in the rules for the time being in force under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

Date:...
Signature...
Designation...
4[*Licensing Authority/Central Licence Approving Authority]
*Delete whichever is not applicable

Conditions of Licence

1. The licence and any certificate of renewal in force shall be kept on the approved premises and shall be produced at the request of an Inspector appointed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
2. If the licensee wishes to undertake during the currency of the licence the manufacture of any drug specified in Schedule X not included above, he should apply to the Licensing Authority for the necessary endorsement as provided in Rule 75(4). This licence will be deemed to be applicable to the items so endorsed.
3. Any change in the 1[competent technical staff] shall be forthwith reported to the Licensing Authority.
4. The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the Licensing Authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.
5. The licensee shall furnish to the Licensing Authority copies of the invoices of sales made to dealers.

6. The licensee shall not manufacture drugs specified in Schedule X covered by this licence for use as ―Physicians Samples‖.]

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E) dt. 22.6.1982.
2. Subs. by G.S.R.788(E) dt. 10.10.1985.
3. Subs. by G.S.R.231(E) dt. 4.6.1996.
4. Subs. by G.S.R. 923(E) dt. 14.12.1992.

1[FORM 28C (See rule 122-G)

Licence to operate a Blood Bank for collection, storage and processing of whole human blood and/or* its components for sale or distribution

l. Number of licence... date of issue ... at the premises situated at ...

2. M/s ... is hereby licensed to collect, store, process and distribute whole blood and/or its components.
3. Name(s) of the item(s) :

4. Name(s) of the Competent Technical Staff:

5. The licence authorises licensee to collect, store, distribute and processing of whole blood and/or blood components subject to the conditions applicable to this licence.
6. The licence shall be in force from ... ...to...

7. The licence shall be subject to the conditions stated below and to such other conditions as may be specified from time to time in the Rules made under Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

Dated: ...

Signature...
Name and Designation ...
*Licensing Authority/
*Central Licence Approving Authority

* Delete whichever is not applicable Conditions of Licence

1. The licensee shall neither collect blood from any professional donor or paid donor nor shall he prepare blood components from the blood collected from such a donor.

2. The licence and any certificate of renewal in force shall be displayed on the approved premises and the original shall be produced at the request of an Inspector appointed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

3. Any change in the technical staff shall be forthwith reported to the Licensing Authority and/or Central Licence Approving Authority.

4. The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority and/or Central Licence approving Authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes places, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for maximum period of three months from the date on which the change has taken place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the Licensing Authority and/or Central Licence Approving Authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.]

1.Ins. by G.S.R. 245(E), dt.
5.4.1999.

1[FORM 28D (See Rules 76) Licence to manufacture for saleor for distribution of 2[Large Volume Parenterals/Sera and Vaccines/recombinant DNA (r-DNA) derived drugs] specified in Schedules C and C(I) excluding those specified in Schedule X Number of licence ...
and date of issue...
1. ... is hereby licensed to manufacture at the premises situated at...
the

following 2[Large

Volume Parenterals/Sera and Vaccines/recombinant DNA (r-DNA) derived drugs] specified in Schedules C and C(1) excluding those specified in Schedule X to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.
2. Name(s) of drug(s)...(each item to be separately specified).
3. Name(s) of competent technical staff:
(a) responsible for manufacturing (b) responsible for testing
1. 1.
2. 2.
4. The licence authorises the sale by way of wholesale dealing and storage for sale

by the licensee of the drugs manufactured under the licence, subject to the conditions applicable to licence for sale.
5. The licence shall be in force from... to ...
6. The licence shall be subject to the conditions stated below and to such other conditions as shall be specified in the rules for the time being in force under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
Date: ...
Signature...
Designation...
*Licensing Authority/*Central Licence Approving Authority
* Delete whichever is not applicable

Conditions of Licence
1. The licence and any certificate of renewal in force shall be kept on the approved premises and shall be produced at the request of an Inspector appointed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

2. If the licensee wishes to undertake during the currency of the licence to manufacture of any drug specified in Schedule C and/or C(I) excluding those specified in Schedule X not included above, he should apply to the Licensing Authority and or Central Licence Approving Authority for the necessary endorsement as provided in the rules. This licence shall be deemed to extend to the items so endorsed.

3. Any change in the competent technical staff named in the licence shall be forthwith reported to the Licensing Authority and/or Central Licence Approving Authority.

4. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority and/or Central Licence Approving Authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licnece shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been applied along with prescribed fee and necessary documents to the Licensing Authority and/or Central Licence Approving Authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.]

Ins. by G.S.R. 119(E), dt: 11.3.1996.
2. Subs. By G.S.R. 26(E), dt: 19.1.2006.

1[FORM 28DA (See Rules 76A, 78A, 83AA) Loan licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution of Large Volume Parenterals/Sera and Vaccines/recombinant DNA (r-DNA) derived drugs excluding those specified in Schedule X

Number of licence ...
and date of issue...
1. ... of ...is hereby granted a loan license to manufacture o n the premises situated at...c/o... the following drugs being 2[Large Volume Parenterals/Sera and Vaccines/recombinant

DNA (r-DNA) derived drugs] specified in Schedules C and C(1) excluding those specified in Schedule X to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.
2. Name(s) of drug(s)...(each item to be separately specified).
3. Name(s) of competent technical staff:
(a) responsible for manufacturing (b) responsible for testing
1. 1.
2. 2.
4. The licence authorises the sale by way of wholesale dealing and storage for sale by the licensee of the drugs manufactured under the licence, subject to the conditions applicable to licence for sale.
5. The licence shall be in force from... to ...
6. The licence shall be subject to the conditions stated below and to such other conditions as shall be specified in the rules for the time being in force under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
Date: ...
Signature...
Designation...
*Licensing Authority/*Central Licence Approving Authority
* Delete whichever is not applicable

Conditions of Licence
1. The licence and any certificate of renewal in force shall be kept on the approved premises and shall be produced at the request of an Inspector appointed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

2. If the licensee wishes to undertake during the currency of the licence to manufacture of any drug specified in Schedule C and/or C(I) excluding those specified in Schedule X not included above, he should apply to the Licensing Authority and or Central Licence Approving Authority for the necessary endorsement as provided in the rules. This licence shall be deemed to extend to the items so endorsed.

3. Any change in the competent technical staff named in the licence shall be forthwith reported to the Licensing Authority and/or Central Licence Approving Authority.

4. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority and/or Central Licence Approving Authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licnece shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been applied along with prescribed fee and necessary documents to the Licensing Authority and/or Central Licence Approving Authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.]

1. Ins. by G.S.R. 574(E), dt: 17.7.2012.
1 [FORM 28E (See rule 122 G)

Licence to manufacture and store blood products for sale or distribution.

l. Number of licence ... date of issue ... at the premises situated at...

2. M/s ... is hereby licensed to manufacture, store, sell or distribute the following blood products:-

Name(s) of the item(s) :
Name(s) of the competent technical staff:
(a) responsible for manufacturing (b) responsible for testing
5. The licence authorises licensee to manufacture, store, sell or distribute the blood products, subject to the conditions applicable to this licence.
6. The licence shall be in force from ... to...

7. The licence shall be subject to the conditions stated below and to such other conditions as may be specified from time to time in the rules made under Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

Dated.: ... Signature...
...

Name and Designation ..
...
*Licensing Authority/ *Central Licence Approving Authority
* Delete whichever is not applicable

Conditions of License

1. The licensee shall not manufacture blood products from the blood drawn from any professional donor or paid donor.

2. The licence and any certificate of renewal in force shall be displayed on the approved premises and shall be produced at the request of an Inspector appointed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

3. Any change in the technical staff shall be forthwith reported to the Licensing Authority and/or Central Licence Approving Authority.

4. The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority and/or Central Licence Approving Authority in writing any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. In the event of any change in the constitution of the firm, the licence shall be deemed to be valid for a period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the Licensing Authority and/or Central Licence Ap provin g Auth ority in the name of the firm with the ch anged constitution.] _

1 [FORM 28F (See rules 122 F to 122-I, 122K, 122P)

Licence To Collect, Process, Test, Store, Banking And Release Of Umbilical Cord Blood Stem Cells.

l. Number of licence ... date of issue ... at the premises situated at...

2. M/s ... is hereby licensed to collect, process, test, store, banking and release of umbilical cord blood stem cells.

Name(s) of competent technical staff :
4. The licence authorises licensee to collect, process, test, store, banking and release of umbilical cord blood stem cells.
5. The licence shall be in force from ... to...

6. The licence shall be subject to the conditions stated below and to such other conditions as may be specified from time to time in the rules made under Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

Dated.: ... Signature...
...

Name and Designation ..
...
*Licensing Authority/ *Central Licence Approving Authority
* Delete whichever is not applicable

Conditions of License

1. Umbilical cord blood specific for an individual will be collected after signing an agreement with the parent(s), whose child‘s umbilical cord blood is to be collected, and the cord blood bank.

2. Umbilical cord blood shall be collected from hospitals, nursing homes, birthing centres and from any other place where a consenting mother delivers, under the supervision of the qualified Registered Medical Practitioner responsible for the delivery.

3. The licence and any certificate of renewal in force shall be displayed on the approved premises and the original shall be produced at the request of an inspector appointed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

4.Any change in the technical staff shall be forthwith reported to the Licensing Authority and/or Central Licence Approving Authority.

5. The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority and/or Central Licence Approving Authority in writing any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. In the event of any change in the constitution of the firm, the licence shall be deemed to be valid for a period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the Licensing Authority and/or Central Licence Ap provin g Auth ority in the name of the firm with the ch anged constitution.] _

FORM 29 (See rule 89)

Licence to manufacture drugs for purposes of examination, test or analysis

1. ...of... is hereby licensed to manufacture the drugs specified below for purposes of examination, test or analysis at...
2. This licence is subject to the conditions prescribed in Part VIII of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.

3. This licence shall be in force for one year from date specified below.

Names of drugs

Date : ... Licensing Authority...

FORM 30 (See rule 90)

Application for licence to manufacture drugs for purposes of examination, test or analysis
1. ...of ... ...by occupation ... hereby apply for licence to manufacture the drugs specified below for purposes of examination, test or analysis at and I undertake to comply with the conditions applicable to the licence.

Names of Drugs

Date...
Signature...

(See rule 139) Application for grant or renewal of a 2[licence to manufacture cosmetics for sale or for Distribution]

1 . 1 / We... of. ... hereby apply for grant /renewal of a licence to manufacture on the premises situated at... the following cosmetics :-
2. Names of Cosmetics ...
3. Names, qualifications and experience of technical staff employed for manufacture and testing ... ...

4. A fee of rupees ...has been credited to Government under the head of account...

Date... Signature...
Note: The application should be accompanied by a plan of the premises.

1. Added by Notfn No.F.1-36/64-D (G.S.R.1183), dt:17.8.1964.
2. Subs. by G..S.R .788 (E), dt. 10.10.1985.

1[FORM 31A (See rule138A)

Application for grant or renewal of loan 2[licence to manufacture cosmetics for sale or for distribution]

1. I / W e ...of. ...hereby apply for grant/r enewal of a loan licence to ma nufacture co smetics for sale on the premises s i t u at e d at...C/o ...the following cosmetics :—

2. Names of Cosmetics...

3. The names, qualifications and experience of the expert shall actually connected with the manufacture and testing of the specified products in the manufacturing premises.

4. I /We enclose−

(a) A true copy of a letter from me / us to the manufacturing concern whose manufacturing capacity is intended to be utilized by me / us.
(b) A true copy of a letter from the *manufacturing concern that they agree to lend the services of their competent technical staff, equipment and premises for the manufacture of each item required by me / us and that they will analyse every batch of and maintain the registers of raw materials , finished products and reports of analysis separately in this behalf.
(c) specimen of labels, cartons of the products proposed to be manufactured.

5. A fee of rupees ... has been credited to Government under the head of account...

Date... Signature...

*Enter here the name and address of the manufacturing concern where the manufacture will be actually carried out and also their licence number.

(See rule140) 2[Licence to manufacture cosmetics for sale or for distribution]

Number of Licence and date of issue 1 ...is hereby licensed to manufacture on the premises situated at ... the following cosmetics under the supervision of the following technical staff:- (a) Names of cosmetics.
(b) Names of technical staff
2. The licence shall remain in force from...to...(both days inclusives)
3. The licence is subject to the conditions stated below and to such other conditions as may be specified in the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.
Date... Signature ...
Designation ...
Conditions of Licence
1. This licence and any certificate of renewal in force shall be kept on the approved premises and shall be produced at the request of an Inspector appointed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

2. Any change in the technical staff shall be forthwith reported to the Licensing Authority.
3. If the licensee wants to manufacture for sale of additional items he should apply to the Licensing Authority for the necessary endorsement to the licence as provided in rule 138 (3). This licence shall be deemed to extend to the cosmetics so endorsed.
3[4. The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the Licensing Authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution.]

1. Added by Notfn No.F.1-36/64-D, dt:17.8.1964.
2. Subs. by G.S.R. 788 (E), dt. 10.10.1985.
3. Added by S.O. 903, dt. 10-2-1976.

1[FORM 32A (See rule 139B) Loan 2[licence to manufacture cosmetics for sale or for distribution]

1. Number of Licence and date of issue...

2 . ...of. ... is hereby granted a loan licence to manufacture the following cosmetics on the premises situated at...C/o...
under

the direction and personal supervision of the following technical staff:
(a) Names of technical staff.
(b) Names of cosmetics.

3. The licence shall remain in force from ... to ...

4. The licence is subject to the conditions stated below and to such other conditions as are specified in the rules for the time being in force under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
Date... Signature ...
Designation ...

Conditions of Licence
1. This licence and any certificate of renewal in force shall be kept on the approved premises and shall be produced at the request of an Inspector appointed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

2. Any change in the technical staff shall be forthwith reported to the Licensing Authority.

3. If the licensee wants to manufacture for sale additional items he should apply to the Licensing Authority for the necessary endorsement to the licence as provided in rule 138A(5).This licence shall be deemed to extend to the cosmetics so endorsed.]

(See rule 141) Certificate of renewal of licence to manufacture cosmetics for sale

1. Certified that licence No...granted on the...
to...f or th e ma nu factu re fo r sale o f the fo llowin g cosmetics at the premises situated at...has been renewed from...and shall expire on...
2. Names of cosmetics.
3. Names of technical staff

Date... Signature...
Designation...]

1. Ins. by G.S.R. 1183, dt. 17.8.1964.

1[FORM 33A

(See rule 141-A)

Certificate of renewal of loan licence to manufacture cosmetic for sale

1. Certified that loan licence No...granted on the ...
. to...for the manufacture for sale of the following cosmetics at the premises situated at C/o...has been renewed from...to ...

2. Names of cosmetics.

3. Names of technical staff.

Date... Signature...
Designation...]

1. Added by G.S.R. 444, dt. 28-4-1973.

(See rules 131 and 150)

Certificate of test or analysis of cosmetic by the Central Drugs Laboratory or the Government Analyst

1. Name of the officer or Inspector from whom received ...
2. Serial number and date of the Officer's / Inspector's memorandum ...
3. Number of sample ...
4. Date of receipt ...
5. Name of the Cosmetic purporting to be contained in the sample...
6. Condition of seals on the 2[packet or on portion of sample or container]
7. Results of test or analysis :— The sample of cosmetics—

(a) contains a prescribed colour only/does not contain a prescribed colour.

(b) does not contain harmful ingredients/ contains harmful ingredients

(c) conforms/does not conform to claims m,ade on the label as to the nature and quality of the cosmetics.
3[(d) contains not more than ...parts per million of Lead and ...parts per million of Arsenic.../contains more than ...parts per million of Lead and ...parts per million of Arsenic.]

Date...
Director...
Central Drugs Laboratoy/Government Analyst]

1. Added by Notfn No.F.1-36/64-D (G.S.R 1183), dt:17.8.1964.

2[See Rules 65, 67-G, 74, 74A, 74B, 78, 78A, 85H, 122P, 142, 142-B, 150E, 158 and 158A]

Form in which the Inspection Book shall be maintained (A) The cover of the Inspection Book shall contain the following particulars, namely :—
1. The name and address of the licensee...
2. Licence number and the date upto which the licence is valid ...
(B) (i) The pages of the Inspection Book shall be serially numbered and duly stamped by the Licensing Authority. The pages, other than the first and the last pages, shall have the following particulars:--

Name and designation of the Inspector who inspects the premises of the licensee:− Date of Inspection...
Observations of the Inspector ...

Signature of the Inspector (ii) The first and last pages of the Inspection Book shall be endorsed by the Licensing Authority with the following words, namely:— Inspection Book maintained by M/s...
situated at ... for licence number ... in Form ... under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.

Seal and Signature of the Licensing Authority.

Notes:- (i) Printed copy of the Inspection Book may be obtained by the licensee from the Licensing Authority on payment.

(ii) The Inspection Book shall be maintained at the premises of the licensee.

(iii) The observations made by the Drug Inspector shall be in triplicate. The original copy shall be retained in the Inspection Book to be maintained in the premises of the licensee. The duplicate copy shall be sent to the Licensing Authority. The triplicate copy shall be taken as record by the Inspector.

1. Added by Notfn. No.F.1-14/68-D (G.S.R. 3869), dt. 26.10.1968.
2. Subs. by G.S.R. 592(E), dt: 13.8.2008.
(See rule 150B)

Application for grant or renewal of approval for carrying out tests on drugs/ cosmetics or raw materials used in the manufacture thereof on behalf of licensees for manufacture for sale of drugs /cosmetics (1) *I/We...of...hereby apply for the grant or renewal of approval for carrying out tests of identity, purity, quality and strength on the following categories of drugs / items of cosmetics or

raw materials used in the manufacture thereof on behalf of licensees for manufacture for sale of drugs / cosmetics.

(2) *Categories of drugs, items of cosmetics:

(a) Drugs other than those specified in Schedules C and C (1) and also excluding Homoeopathic Drugs:-
1. Crude vegetable drugs.
2. Mechanical contraceptives.
3. Surgical dressings.
4. Drugs requiring the use of ultravoilet / Infra Red. or Chromatography.
5. Disinfectants.
6. Other drugs.
(b) Drugs specified in Schedules C and C (1):—
1. Sera, Vaccines, Antigens, Toxins, Antitoxins, Toxoids, Bacteriophages and similar Immunological Products.
2. Antibiotics.
3. Vitamins
4. Parenteral preparations.
5. Sterilized surgical ligature / suture.
6. Drugs requiring the use of animals for their test.
7. Drugs requiring microbiological tests.
8. Drugs requiring the use of Ultravoilet/ Infra Red/ Spectrophotomete or Chromatography.
9. Other drugs.
(c) Homoeopathic drugs.
(d) Cosmetics.
(3) Name, qualifications and experience of expert staff employed for testing and the person-in-charge of testing.
(4) List of testing equipments provided.
(5) *I/We enclose a plan of the testing premises showing the location and area of the different sections thereof.
(6) An inspection fee of rupees ...has been credited to Government under the Head of Account...

Date... Signature...]
* Delete whichever is not applicable

Ins. by Notfn. No .X. 11014/7/76-D&MS (G.S.R 1172), dt. 23-8-1977.

(See rule 150C)

Approval for carrying out tests on drugs / cosmetics and raw materials used in their manufacture on behalf of licensees for manufacture for sale of drugs /cosmetics

Number of approval and date of issue:...

(1) Approval is hereby granted to ... ...for carrying out tests for identity, purity, quality and strength on the following categories of drugs/items of cosm etic s a n d the ra w m a terials use d in the m a nufac ture thereof on the pre m ise s situated ...

Categories of drugs / items of cosmetics ...
...
...
(2) Names of 2[competent technical staff] employed for testing and the person-in- charge of testing.

(3) The approval shall be in force from ... to...

(4) The approval is subject to the conditions stated below and such other conditions as may be specified in the rules for the time being in force under the Act.

Date... Signature ...

Designation ...

Conditions of Approval

(1) This approval and any certificate of renewal in Form 38 shall be kept in the approved premises and shall be produced at the request of the Inspectors appointed under the Act.

(2) If the approved institution wishes to undertake during the currency of the approval the testing of any other category of drugs or items of cosmetics it should apply to the approving authority for necessary endorsement as provided in rule 150-B.This approval will be deemed to extend to the item so endorsed.

(3) Any change in the analytical staff or in the person-in-charge of the testing shall be forthwith reported to the approving authority.
3[(4) The approved institution shall inform the approving authority in writing in the event of any change of the constitution of the institution operating under this Form.
Where any change in the constitution of the institution takes place, the current approval shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless in the meantime, a fresh approval has been taken from the approving authority in the name of the institution with the changed constitution.]

1.Ins. by G.S.R.1172, dt:23.8.1977.
2. Subs. by. G.S.R. 231(E), dt. 4.6.1996.

(See rule 150J)

Certificate of renewal of approval for carrying out tests on drugs / cosmetics and raw materials used in the manufacture thereof on behalf of licensees for manufacture for sale of drugs / cosmetics (1) Certified that approval number ... granted on the ... for carrying out tests of identity, purity, quality and strength on the following categories of drugs/ items of cosmetics and the raw materials used in the manufacture thereof at the premises situated at...has been renewed from...to ...

Categories of drugs/items of cosmetics

...
...

(2) Names of 2[competent technical staff] and person-in-charge of testing.

Date ... Signature...
Designation...

1. Ins. By G.S.R. 1172, dt:23.8.1977.
2.Subs. by. G.S.R.231(E) ,dt. 4.6.1996.

[See rule150E(f)]

Report of test or analysis by approved institution

(1) Name of manufacturer from whom sample received together with his manufacturing licence number under the Act and under the rules made thereunder.

(2) Reference number and date of the letter from the manufacturer under which the sample was forwarded.
(3) Date of receipt of the sample.
(4) Name of drug / cosmetics / raw material purporting to be contained in the sample.

(5) Details of raw material/final product in bulk/final product (in finished pack)* as obtained from the manufacturer:

(a) Original manufacturer's name in the case of raw materials and drugs repacked.
(b) Batch number.
2[(c) Batch size as represented by sample.] (d) Date of manufacture, if any.
(e) Date of expiry, if any.
(6) Results of test or analysis with protocols of test or analysis applied.

In the opinion of the undersigned, the sample referred to above is *of standard quality/is not of standard quality as defined in the Act and the rules made thereunder for the reasons given below.

Date... ...
Signature of Person-in-charge of testing

Note:- Final product includes repacked material.

*Delete whichever is not applicable
1. Ins. By G.S.R. 1172, dt:23.8.1977.
2. Subs. by. G.S.R. 681(E), dt. 6.6.1988.

1[Forms 40 to 43 (Pertaining to Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs replaced by Forms Nos .47 to 50.)

[1. Ins. by G.S.R. 701(E), dt. 27.9.2001 ]

(See rule 24-A)

Application for issue of Registration Certificate for import of drugs into India under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules 1945

I/We* ... (Name and full address) hereby apply for the grant of Registration Certificate for the manufacturer, M/s... (full address with telephone, fax and E-mail address of the foreign manufacturer) for his premises, and manufactured drugs meant for import into India.
1. Names of drugs for registration.
2[***]
2. I/We enclose herewith the information and undertakings specified in Schedule D (1) and Schedule D(II) duly signed by the manufacturer for grant of Registration Certificate for the premises stated below.
3. A fee offor registration of premises, the particulars of w hich are g iv en belo w, o f the man u factu rer h as b een cred ited to th e Government under the Head of Account "0210-Medical and Public Health, 04-Public Health, 104-Fees and Fines‖ under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945-Central vide Challan No. dated(attached in original).

4. A fee offor registration of the drugs for import as specified at Serial No. 2 above has been credited to the Government under the Head of Account "0210-Medical and Public Health, 04-Public Health, 104-Fees and Fines" under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945-Central vide Challan No., dated. (attached in original).

5. Particulars of premises to be registered where manufacture is carried on: Address (es)...

Telephone No...
Fax...
E-mail...
I/We* undertake to comply with all terms and conditions required to obtain Registration Certificate and to keep it valid during its validity period.
Place:
Date:
Signature

Name

Designation Seal/Stamp of manufacturer or his authorised Agent in India.

(Note: In case the applicant is an authorised agent of the manufacturer in India, the Power of Attorney is to be enclosed).

*Delete whichever is not applicable.

1. Ins. by G.S.R. 604(E) dt. 24-8-2001 (w.e.f. 1-1-2003).
2. Figures 1,2,3 omitted by G.S.R. 35(E), dt. 20.1.2005.

(See rule 27 A) Registration Certificate Registration Certificate to be issued for import of drugs into India under Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945

Registration Certificate No... Date...

M/s (Name and full address of registered office) having factory premises at...(full address) has been registered under rule 27-A as a manufacturer and is hereby issued this Registration Certificate.
2. Name (s) of drugs which may be imported under this Registration Certificate:

2[***]

3. This Registration Certificate shall be in force from to_unless it is sooner suspended or cancelled under the rules.

4. This Registration Certificate is issued through the office of the manufacturer

or his authorised agent in India M/s (name and full address) who will be responsib le for th e business activities of th e manufacturer, in India in all respects.

5. This Registration Certificate is subject to the conditions, stated below and to such other conditions as may be specified in the Act and the rules, from time to time.

Place...
Date...
Licensing Authority Seal/Stamp

Conditions of the Registration Certificate.

1. The Registration Certificate shall be displayed at a prominent place by the authorised agent.

2. No drug shall be registered unless it has a free sale approval in the country of origin, and/or in other major countries.

3. The manufacturer or his authorised agent in India shall comply with the conditions of the import licence issued under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.

4. The manufacturer or his authorised agent in India shall inform the licensing authority forthwith in the event of any administrative action taken due to adverse reaction, viz. market withdrawal, regulatory restrictions, or cancellation of authorization, and/or not of standard quality report of any drug pertaining to this Registration Certificate declared by the Regulatory Authority of the country of origin or by any Regulatory Authority of any other country, where the drug is marketed/sold or distributed.

The dispatch and marketing of the drug in such cases shall be stopped immediately, and the licensing authority shall be informed immediately. Further action in respect of such stopped marketing of drug shall be followed as per the direction of the licensing authority. In such cases, action equivalent to that taken with reference to the concerned drug in the country of origin or in the country of marketing shall be followed in India also, in consultation with the licensing authority. The licensing authority may, however, direct any further modification to this course of action, including the withdrawal of the drug from Indian market within 48 hours time period.

5. The manufacturer or his authorised agent in India shall inform the licensing authority within 30 days in writing in the event of any change in manufacturing process, or in packaging, or in labelling or in testing, or in documentation of any of the drugs pertaining to this Registration Certificate.

In such cases, where there shall be any major change/modification in manufacturing, or in processing or in testing, or in documentation as the case may be, at the discretion of the licensing authority, the manufacturer or his authorised agent in

India shall obtain necessary approval within 30 days by submitting a separate application along with the registration fee, as specified in clause (ii) of sub-rule (3) of rule 24-A.

6. The manufacturer or his authorised agent in India shall inform the licensing authority immediately in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm and / or address of the registered office / factory premises operating under this Registration Certificate. Where any such change in the constitution of the firm and/or address takes place, the current Registration Certificate shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change has taken place unless, in the meantime, a fresh Registration Certificate has been taken from the licensing authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution of the firm and/or changed address of the registered office or factory premises.]
1. Ins. by G.S.R. No.604(E), dt. 24-8-2001 (w.e.f. 1-1-2003)
2. Figures 1,2,3 omitted by G.S.R. 32, dt. 20.1.2005.

(See rule 129A)

Application for issue of Registration Certificate for import of cosmetics into India under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945

I/We* ... (Name and full address) hereby apply for the grant of Registration Certificate for the manufacturer, M/s... (full address with telephone, fax and E-mail address of the foreign manufacturer) for his premises, and manufactured cosmetics meant for import into India.
1. Name of cosmetics along with their brand name and pack size(s) and variants for registration.

(1) ...
(4)...
(2)...
(5)...
(3)...
(6)...

2. I/We* enclose herewith the information and undertakings specified in Schedule D (III) duly signed by the manufacturer for grant of Registration Certificate for the premises stated below.
3. A fee offor registration of cosmetics for import as specified at serial no. 2 above has b een cred ited to th e C e n t r a l Government under the Head of Account "0210-Medical and Public Health, 04-Public Health, 104-Fees and Fines‖ under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945-Central vide Challan No. dated(attached in original).

4. Particulars of premises to be registered where manufacture is carried on:

Address (es)...

Telephone No...

Fax...

E-mail...
I/We* undertake to comply with all terms and conditions required to obtain Registration Certificate and to keep it valid during its validity period.
Place:...
Date:...
Signature...
Name...
Designation...
Seal/Stamp of manufacturer or his authorised Agent in India.

(Note: In case the applicant is an authorised agent of the manufacturer in India, the Power of Attorney is to be enclosed).

*Delete whichever is not applicable.

1. Ins. by G.S.R. 4 2 6 (E) dt. 19-5-2010, read with corrigendum G.S.R263(E) dt:30.3.2011, corrigendum G.S.R.
733(E) dt:29.9.2011, corrigendum G.S.R.270(E) dt:30.3.2012 and corrigendum G.S.R. 733(E) dt:29.9.2012.

(See rule 129C) Registration Certificate Registration Certificate to be issued for import of cosmetics into India under

Registration Certificate No... Date...

M/s (Name and full address of registered office)...having factory premises at ... ... ... ... . . ( full address) has been registered under rule 1 2 9 A as a manufacturer and is hereby issued this Registration Certificate.
2. Name (s) of cosmetics, along with thrir brand names and pack size(s) and variants which may be imported under this Registration Certificate:

(1)...
(2)...
(3)...
3. This Registration Certificate shall be in force from ...
to...unless it is sooner suspended or cancelled under the rules.

4. This Registration Certificate is issued through the office of the manufacturer or his authorised agent or importer in India or by the subsidiary in India authorized by the manufacturer, namely.-M/s (name and full address) who shall be responsib le for th e business activities of th e manufacturer, in India in all respects.
5. This Registration Certificate is subject to the conditions, stated below and to such other conditions as may be specified in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the rules made thereunder, from time to time in this regard..

Place...
Date...
Licensing Authority Seal/Stamp

Conditions of the Registration Certificate.

1. The Registration Certificate shall be produced by the authorised importer/distributor/agent as and when required by the licensing authority/regulatory authority.

2. The manufacturer or his authorised importer/distributor/agent in India shall inform the licensing authority forthwith in the event of any administrative action taken namely, market withdrawal, regulatory restrictions, or cancellation of authorization, and/or not of standard quality report of any cosmetic pertaining to this Registration Certificate declared by the Regulatory Authority of the country of origin or by any Regulatory Authority of any other country, where the cosmetic is marketed/sold or distributed.

The dispatch and marketing of the cosmetic in such cases shall be stopped immediately, and the licensing authority shall be informed immediately. Further action in respect of such stopped marketing of drug shall be followed as per the

direction of the licensing authority. In such cases, action equivalent to that taken with reference to the concerned cosmetic in the country of origin or in the country of marketing shall be followed in India also, in consultation with the licensing authority.
The licensing authority may, however, direct any further modification to this course of action, including the withdrawal of the c o s m e t i c from Indian market within 48 hours time period.

3. The manufacturer or his authorised agent/importer/distributor or subsidiary in India shall inform the licensing authority within 30 days in writing in the event of additional variants/additional cosmetic category/additional manufacturing location or any change in labeling or in testing, or in documentation of any of the c o s m e t i c pertaining to this Registration Certificate.

In such cases, where there shall be additional variants/additional cosmetic category/additional manufacturing location, as the case may be, at the discretion of the licensing authority, the manufacturer or his authorised agent/importer/distributor/subsidary in India shall apply for necessary approval within 30 days by submitting a separate application along with the registration fee.

4. The manufacturer or his authorised agent in India shall inform the licensing authority immediately in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of the firm and / or address of the registered office / factory premises operating under this Registration Certificate. Where any such change in the constitution of the firm and/or address takes place, the current Registration Certificate shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change has taken place unless, in the meantime, a fresh Registration Certificate has been taken from the licensing authority in the name of the firm with the changed constitution of the firm and/or changed address of the registered office or factory premises.]

1. Ins. by G.S.R. 4 2 6 (E) dt. 19-5-2010, read with corrigendum G.S.R263(E) dt:30.3.2011, corrigendum G.S.R.
733(E) dt:29.9.2011, corrigendum G.S.R.270(E) dt:30.3.2012 and corrigendum G.S.R. 733(E) dt:29..2012.

(See rules 122A, 122B, 122D and 122 DA) Application for grant of permission to import or manufacture a New Drug or to undertake clinical trial.

I/We*... of M/s. ... ...
(address) hereby apply for grant of permission for import of and/or clinical trial or for approval to manufacture a new drug or fixed dose combination or subsequent permission for already approved new drug. The necessary information / data is given below :

1. Particulars of new drug :
(1) Name of the drug.
(2) Dosage form.
(3) Composition of the formulation :
(4) Test specification.
(i) active ingredients.
(ii) inactive ingredients.
(5) Pharmacological classification of the drug.
(6) Indications for which proposed to be used.
(7) Manufacturer of the raw material (bulk drug substances).
(8) Patent status of the drug.
2. Data submitted along with the application (as per Schedule Y with indexing and page numbers:) A. Permission to market a new drug :

(1) Chemical and Pharmaceutical information.
(2) Animal Pharmacology.
(3) Animal Toxicology.
(4) Human / Clinical Pharmacology (Phase I).
(5) Exploratory Clinical Trials (Phase II).
(6) Confirmatory Clinical Trials (Phase III) (including published review articles) (7) Bio-availability, dissolution and stability study data.
(8) Regulatory status in other countries.
(9) Marketing information :
(a) Proposed product monograph.
(b) Drafts of labels and cartons.
(10) Application for test licence.
2[(11) New Chemical Entity and Global Clinical Trial- (a) Assessment of risk versus benefit to the patients (b) Innovation vis-à-vis existing therapeutic option (c) Unmet medical need in the country.]

B. Subsequent approval / permission for manufacture of already approved new drug :
(a) Formulation:
(1) Bio-availability / bio-equivalence protocol.
(2) Name of the investigator/center.
(3) Source of raw material (bulk drug substances) and stability study data.
(b) Raw material (bulk drug substances):
(1) Manufacturing method.
(2) Quality control parameters and/or analytical specification, stability report.
(3) Animal toxicity data.
C. Approval / Permission for fixed dose combination:
(1) Therapeutic Justification.
(authentic literature in 3[pre-reviewed journals]/text books) (2) Data on pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics combination.
(3) Any other data generated by the applicant on the safety and efficacy of the combination.

D. Subsequent Approval or approval for new indication - new dosage form:
(1) Number and date of Approval / permission already granted.
(2) Therapeutic justification for new claim / modified dosage form (3) Data generated on safety, efficacy and quality parameters.

A total fee of rupees ... (in words) ... has been

credited to the Government under the Head of Account... (Photocopy of receipt is enclosed).

Dated : ... Signature...
Designation...

Note: *Delete whichever is not applicable.
_

1. Forms 44 to 46 A ins. by No.G.S.R. 900 (E), dt. 12.12.2001.
3. Subs by G.S.R. 26(E), dt. 19.1.2006.

(See rules 122 A, 122 D and 122 DA) Permission to import Finished Formulation of a New Drug Number of the permission and date of issue...
M/s ... of...
(address) is hereby permitted to import the following new drug formulation under rule 122 A /122 D/122 DA of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.
(1) Name of the New Drug :
(2) Dosage form :
(3) Composition :
(4) Indications :

Dated:...
Signature...

Name and designation of Licensing Authority

Conditions for Grant of Approval / Permission.

(1) The formulation shall conform to the specifications approved by the Licensing Authority.
(2) The proper name of the drug shall be printed or written in indelible ink and shall appear in a more conspicuous manner than the trade name, if any, which shall be shown immediately after or under the proper name on the label of the innermost container of the drug or every other covering in which the container is packed.
(3) The label of the innermost container of the drug and every other covering in which the container is packed shall bear a conspicuous red vertical line on the left side running throughout the body of the label which shall not be less than 1 mm in width and without disturbing the other conditions printed on the label to depict it as prescription drug.
(4) The label on the immediate container of the drug as well as the packing in which the container is enclosed should contain the following warning:

"WARNING : To be sold by retail on the prescription of a ... Only."

2[(5) Post marketing surveillance study shall be conducted during initial period of two years of marketing of the new drug formulation, after getting the protocol and the names of the investigator duly approved by the Licensing Authority.] (6) All reported adverse reactions related to the drug shall be intimated to the Drugs Controller, India and Licensing Authority and regulatory action resulting from their review should be complied with.
(7) No claims except those mentioned above shall be made for the drug without the prior approval of the Licensing Authority.
(8) Specimen of the carton, labels, package insert that will be adopted for marketing the drug in the country shall be got approved from the Licensing Authority before the drugs is marketed.
(9) Each consignment of imported drug shall be accompanied by a test/analysis report.
_

1. Ins. by No.G.S.R. 900 (E), dt. 12.12.2001.
2. Subs by G.S.R. 101(E), dt. 18.2.2011.

1[FORM 45A (See rules 122A and 122DA) Permission to import raw material (new bulk drug substance)

Number of the permission and date of issue...
M/s ...of...(address) is hereby permitted to import the following raw material (new bulk drug substances) under rule 122 A / 122DA of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945, namely :-

Name of the raw material (new bulk drug substances):
(1) ...
(2) ...
(3) ...

Dated ... Signature ...

Name and Designation of the Licensing Authority...

Conditions for Grant of Approval / Permission

(1) The raw material (new bulk drug substance) shall conform to the test specifications as approved by the Licensing Authority.

(2) For manufacture of raw material (new bulk drug substance) or its formulation in the country, separate approval under rule 122-B shall be obtained from the Licensing Authority.

(3) The permission to import shall not be used to convey or imply that the raw material (new bulk drug) is categorized as "life saving or essential drug."] _

(See rules 122 B, 122 D and 122 DA) Permission / Approval for manufacture of new drug formulation

Number of permission and date of issue ... ... M/s of ... (address) is hereby granted Permission/Approval to manufacture following new drug formulation under rule 122B/122D/122DA of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945, namely :-

(1) Name of the formulation:
(2) Dosage form:
(3) Composition:
(4) Indications:

Dated ... Signature ...
Name and designation of Licensing Athority...
Conditions for Grant of Approval / Permission.
(1) The formulation shall conform to the specifications approved by the Licensing Authority.
(2) The proper name of the drug shall be printed or written in indelible ink and shall appear in a more conspicuous manner than the trade name, if any, which shall be shown immediately after or under the proper name on the label of he innermost container of the drug or every other covering in which the container is packed.

(3) The label of the innermost container of the drug and every other covering in which the container is packed shall bear a conspicuous red vertical line on the left side running throughout the body of the label which shall not be less than 1 mm in width and without disturbing the other conditions printed on the label to depict it as prescription drug.
(4) The label on the immediate container of the drug as well as the packing in which the container is enclosed should contain the following warning:

"WARNING : To be sold by retail on the prescription of a ... only."

2[(5) Post marketing surveillance study shall be conducted during initial period of two years of marketing of the new drug formulation, after getting the protocol and the names of the investigator duly approved by the Licensing Authority.] (6) All reported adverse reactions related to the drug shall be intimated to the Drugs Controller, India and Licensing Authority and regulatory action resulting from their review should be complied with.
(7) No claims except those mentioned above shall be made for the drug without the prior approval of the Licensing Authority.
(8) Specimen of the carton, labels, package insert that will be adopted for marketing the drug in the country shall be got approved from the Licensing Authority before the drug is marketed.
_

2. Subs by G.S.R.101(E), dt. 18.2.2011.
1[FORM 46A (See rules 122 B and 122 DA) Permission/ Approval for manufacture of raw material (new bulk drug substance)

Name of the permission/ approval and date of issue ...
M/s ... of... (address) is hereby granted Permission/Approval to manufacture the following raw material (new bulk drug substance) under rule 122B / 122DA of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules,

Name of the raw material (new bulk drug substance):
(1) ...
(2) ...
(3) ...

Dated ... Signature ...
Name and designation of Licensing Authority.

Conditions for Grant of Permission /Approval

(1) The raw material (new bulk drug substance) shall conform to the specifications approved by the Licensing Authority.
(2) The raw material (new bulk drug substance) can be sold to only those manufacturers who have permission, in writing, from Licensing Authority, either to use the drug for development purpose/clinical trial-bio-equivalence study or to manufacture the formulation.
(3) For manufacture of the formulation in the country, separate approval under rule 122B shall be obtained from the Licensing Authority.]

1. Ins. by No.G.S.R. 900 (E), dt. 12.12.2001.

(See rule 160 A) Application for grant or renewal of approval for carrying out tests on Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs or raw materials used in the manufacture thereof on behalf of licensees for manufacture for sale of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs

1. *I/We... of ... hereby apply for the grant/renewal of approval for carrying out tests of identity, purity, quality and strength on the following categories of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs or raw materials used in the manufacture thereof on behalf of licensee for manufacture for sale of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs.
2. *Categories of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs other than those specified in the First Schedule to this Act for which testing will be carried out:

AYURVEDA AND SIDDHA UNANI Asava and Arista Nabeez, Khal (Sirka) Arka-Tinir Majoon and its sub-categories Itrifal, Jawarish, Khameera, Laooq, Halwar Avaleha and Paka-Ilakam Sufoof, Zuroor, Sunoon.
Kavatha Curna-Kutinir Curanam Namak, Khar Guggulu Raughan Ghrita-Ney Zimad

Churna-Curanam Habb (Pill) Taila-Tailam Shiyaf Dravaka-Tiravakam Qutoor (drops) Lavana-Uppu Kohal (Surma), Kajal Kshara-Saram Satt, Usara Lepa-Pacai Kushta Vati, Gutika-Kulikai Joshanda (Single drugs) Vartti Sharbat Sikanjabeen Netrabindu (Aschyotan) Sayyal, Arq (Distillates) Anjana-Kanmai Qurs (Tablet) Sattva-Sattu Marham, Qairooti Kupipakva Rasayana-Kuppi Centuram Humool, Furzaja Parpati Bakhoor Pishti Nabati Advia Bhasma-Parpam Maadni Advia Mandura-Atai kutinir Asjad Advia
23. Rasay oga-C entur am 23. Haiwani Advia
24. Lauha 24. Jauhar
25. Ghana Sattva 25. Natool
26. Kvath Pravahi- Kutinir 26. Nashooq, Naswar
27. Panak (Syrup)-Manappaku 27. Shamoom

28. Tablet-Mattirai 28. Saoot (Nasal drops)
29. Capsule 29. Mazoogh

30. Ointment- Kalimapu 30. Tila
31. Phalavarti 31. Lashooq
32. Dhoomravarti/Doopan 32. Gulqand
33. Kshar Sutra/Kshar Varti 33. Fateela
34. Single drugs: 34. Ghaza, Utban, Sasbhh

(a) Plant based

(b) Mineral based (c) Metal based (d) Animal based (e) Synthetic (f) Any other Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani formulation
35. Pushp (Phool) 35. Capsule
36. Nasya 36. Huqna
37. Swarasa (Fresh juice) 37. Naurah
38. Karna Bindu (Ear drops) 38. Latookh
39. Any other dosage of Patent and 39. Vajoor (Throat paint) Proprietary and Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani Drug
40. Mazmazah (Mouth washer)

(3) Names, qualifications and experience of experts employed for testing and the person in-charge of testing.
(4) List of testing equipment provided.

(5) *I/We enclose a plan of the testing premises showing the location and area of the different sections thereof.
(6) An inspection fee of rupees ... has been credited to Government under the head of account ...

Dated...
Signature...
Full address of the Applicant
*Delete which is not applicable.

1. Ins. by G.S.R. 701(E), dt. 27.9.2001 and subs. by G.S.R. 73(E), dt. 31.1.2003.

(See Rule 160 B)

Approval for carrying out tests or analysis on Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs or raw materials used in the manufacture thereof on behalf of licensees for manufacture for sale of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs

Number of approval and date of issue...

1. Approval is hereby granted to ...for carrying out tests in identity, purity, quality and strength on the following categories of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs and the raw materials used in the manufacture thereof on the premises situated at ...

Categories of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs.

...
...
...

2. Name of experts employed for testing and the person-in-charge of testing ...(experts) and... (person in-charge).
3. The approval shall be in force from ... to...

4. The approval is subject to the conditions stated below and such other conditions as may be specified in the rules for the time being in force under the Act.

Date ... Signature ...

Place ... Designation ...

Seal of State Licensing Authority

Conditions of approval (1) This approval and any certificate of renewal in Form 49 shall be displayed in the approved premi ses and s h all be produced at the request of the Inspectors appointed under the Act.

(2) If the applicant wishes to undertake during the currency of the approval the testing of any other category of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs it should apply to the approving authority for necessary endorsement as provided in Rule 160A. This approval will be deemed to extend to the items so endorsed.

(3) Any change in the experts or in the person in-charge of the testing shall be forthwith reported to the approving authority.
(4) The applicant shall inform the approving authority in writing in the event of any change of the constitution of the laboratory operating under this Form. Where any change in the constitution of the laboratory takes place, the current approval shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place unless in the meantime, a fresh approval has been taken from the approving authority in the name of the laboratory with the changed constitution.]

_

1.Ins. by G.S.R. No.702(E) dt. 27-9-2001 and subs.by.G.S.R.73(E), dt.31.01.2003.

(See rule 160- I) Certificate of renewal for carrying out tests or analysis on Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs or raw materials used in the manufacture thereof on behalf of licensees for manufacture for sale of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs

1. Certified that approval number ... g r an t ed o n th e ...
day o f ... 20... for carrying out tests of identity, purity, quality and strength on the following categories of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani, drugs and the raw materials used in the manufacture thereof at the premises situated at ... has been renewed from ... to... (date).

Catagories of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs:
...
2. Name of experts and the person-in-charge of testing...
(experts) and...(person in charge)

Date: ... Signature ...
Place : ...
Designation ...
Seal of State Licensing Authority ]
1. Ins. by G.S.R. No.701(E) dt. 27-9-2001 and subs. by G.S.R.73(E) dt. 31.01.2003.

[See rule 160 D(f)]

Report of test or analysis by approved Laboratory

(1) Name of manufacturer from whom sample received together with his manufacturing licence number under the Act or the rules made thereunder.

...
(2) Reference number and date of the letter from the manufacturer under which the same was forwarded.
...
(3) Date of receipt of the sample ...

(4) Name of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drug of raw material purporting to be contained in the sample.
...

(5) Details of raw material of final product (in bulk finished pack)* as obtained from the manufacturer:

(a) Original manufacturer's name in the case of raw materials and drugs repacked... ...
(b) Batch number...
(c) Batch size as represented by sample...
(d) Date of manufacture, if any ...
(e) Date of expiry, if any...

(6) Results of test or analysis with protocols of test or analysis applied or as per Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani Pharmacopoeial standards.

(7) Other specific tests for identity, purity, quality and strength of Patent and Proprietary drugs.
In the opinion of the undersigned, the sample referred to above is of standard
*quality/is not of standard quality as defined in the Act or the rules made thereunder for the reasons given below ...
Date...
Place...
(Signature of the person-in-charge of testing) (F. No...) Name and Designation and Seal...
Name and Address of the Laboratory...
License No...
Note: Final product includes repacked material.
*Delete whichever is not applicable.
1. Ins. by G.S.R. 701(E) dt. 27-9-2001 and subs. by G.S.R.73(E) dt. 31.1.2003

1 [SCHEDULE B

(See rules 7 and 48)

Fees for test or analysis by the Central Drugs Laboratories or State Drugs Laboratories :

1. I. Fees for test and assay of Drugs requiring use of animals

Adrenocorticotrophic hormone assay Rupees

Gonadotrophic hormone for LH activity

FSH Activity

Posterior pituitary extract or its synthetic substitute for

oxytocin activity Vasopressor activity

Insulin and insulin in combination for hypoglycaemic activity

Hyaluronidase

Glucagon

Heparin for anticoagulant activity

Protamine sulphate

Depressor or Histamine like substane

Pyrogen test

Antigenecity or foreign protein test

Abnormal or undue toxicity or safety test

Determination of Lethal doses, LD10 or LD 50 in mice

Skin sensitivity/eye irrigation

Implantation test

2. Microbiological tests and assays - Bioassay of Antibiotic

Microbiological assay of vitamins

Phenol coefficient

Preservatives – Microbial challenge test

Sterility test – Parenteral preparations

Surgical dressings

Syringes and needles

Transfusion and infusion sets or assemblies

Other sterile devices

1. Subs. by G.S.R. No.478(E), dt. 7-8-1998.

3. Identification tests -

(a) Chemical Methods

(b) Microscopical

(c) IR Spectroscopy

(d) (e) UV Spectroscopy Chromotography

(i) Paper

(ii) Thin layer

(iii) Column

(iv) GLC

(v)
HPLC

(vi) Gel Filtration

(f) Electrophoresis (i) Paper and Cellulose acetate

(ii) Polyacrylamide Gel, starch gel, agar gel 300 each Physical tests – (a) (b) Optical rotation, specific gravity, refractive index, weight per ml, fluorescence.
Viscocity 75 each

(c) (d) (e) pH, Solubility, loss on drying, net content, ash, sulphated ash etc.
Absorbancy, wt/unit area (surgical), foreign matter, extractive value, thread count etc.
Uniformity of weight (i) Tablets 20 each 30 each

(i) Capsules

(f) (g) Acid value, iodine value, peroxide value, Soponification value, acetyl value.
Disintegration tests – 100 each (i) Ordinary tablets

(ii) Capsule

(iii) Sugar Coated tablets

(iv) Enteric coated tablets

(h) Dissolution test

(i) (j) (k) Uniformity of content.
Wt. per unit area (powder), particle size, count, methoxy value.
Limit test for impurities

200 each 100 each (l) Related substances (i) T LC method (A) Without reference standard

(B) With reference standard

(ii) Gas Liquid Chromatography (A) Without reference standard (B) With reference standard (iii)High pressure Liquid Chromatography (A)Without reference standards (B)With reference standards

(m) Water (Karl Fisher) 200

(5) Assays - (a) General chemical methods 100 for each ingredient

(b) Non-aqueous/instrumental 200 for each ingredient (c) Chromatography

(i) TLC

(ii) Column

(iii) GLC

(iv) HPLC

(v) Gel filtration

(d) Nitrogen determination

(e) Medicinal gases

(6) Polymorph test -

(Content of polymorph A in chloramphenicol palmitate) Surgical sutures (Depending on number of tests to be carried) 200-500 Other miscellaneous tests 100-500 II Fees for Sera and Vaccine – Sterility test

Abnormal toxicity test

Specific toxicity test

Inactivation test (Rabies)

Potency testing of rabies vaccine

Potency testing of pertussis fraction of DPT vaccine

Potency testing of tetanus fraction of DPT/DT/TT vaccine

Potency testing of diphtheria Fraction of DPT/DTE vaccine.

Testing of antisera for the specific titre

Potency testing measles/Mumps/Rubella vaccine 760 each Testing of Oral Polio Vaccine (OPV) – Potency

Identity

Stability

Potency testing of Japanese Encephalitis Vaccine

Potency testing of Snake

Venom serum for each venom Identity testing for vaccines/sera Cell culture (Other than OPV)

Other than cell culture

Estimation of volume/pH/total solids/No. of organisms/Physical checking.
Estimation of total proteins/aluminium 50 each content/phenol/formaldehyde/thiomersal/moisture. 200 each Pyrogen testing 500 Stability test for vaccines other than Oral Polio Vaccine 4550

III Cosmetics 400 – 1500 (The exact amount of the fee shall be determined by the Director of Laboratory or the Government Analyst, as the case may be).
IV Rubber Condoms

IV Homoeopathic medicines:

1. Identification test for raw material of botanical origin (other than assay of constituents).
2. Identification test for raw material of chemical origin (other than assay)

3. Limit test for drugs of chemical origin 150
4. Assay of total alkaloids or of drugs of chemical origin 100
5. Identification test for drugs of animal origins or microbiological.
6. Fees for testing of Mother tincture, lower potencies upto 3x or equivalent.
7. U.V. or I.R. or H.P.C.L. defect determination Determination of Biochemic drug through atomic absorbance spectrophotometer.

Note :-

1. For tests not listed in the Schedule, charges will be determined by the Director or the Government Analyst of the laboratory / institute as the case may be.

2. For the tests relating to Ayurvedic, Unani and Siddha medicines, charges will be determined by the Adviser (Indigenous System of Medicine), Director or Government Analyst of the Laboratory / Institute, as the cased may be.]

1. Subs by G.S.R. 478 (E), dt:7.8.1998.

1[SCHEDULE B(1) (See rules 163F)

FEES FOR THE TEST OR ANALYSIS BY THE PHARMACOPOEIAL LABORATORY FOR INDIAN MEDICINE (PLIM) OR THE GOVERNMENT ANALYST

Type of testing/analysis Cost of testing or analysis in Rupees

(1) (2) Test for sterlity
250.00 Abnormal toxicity or undue toxicity or safety test
750.00 Determination of lethal does LD 50 to 10 on mice
2500.00 Chemical test for each ingredient
500.00 Disinfectants
1000.00 Any other test requiring animal experimentation
500.00 Microbiological assay
750.00 Microscopic examination of single drugs
250.00 Microscopic examination of raw material of compound drug
500.00 Chemical identification as per Pharmacopoeia
250.00 Disintegration of tablets and capsules (a) ordinary (b) sugar coated (c) enteric coated

100.00
200.00
400.00 Psysiochemical Assays
300.00 Test other than assay (limit tests for impurities, ash content, total solids, acid value, saponification value, loss on drying etc.) for each test.
100.00 Optical rotation
250.00 Refractive index
250.00 Arsenic testing
250.00 Paper chromatography
250.00 Thin layer chromatography
300.00 Column chromatography
2500.00 Gas liquid chromatography
1000.00 HPTLC restricted to single drugs qualitative
1000.00 Atomical absorption spectrophotometry for Hg, Pb, As, Cd
500.00 Cosmetics/ tails/ creams
500.00 Identification test for raw material of plant origin (other than assay of constitutents)
125.00 Identification test for raw material of chemical origin (other than assay)
100.00 Limit test for drug of chemical origin
150.00 Other miscellaneous tests
1000.00

Note: Sample testing charges will be determined / revised by the Director or Government Analyst of the Pharmacopoeial laboratory for Indian Medicine, as the case may be, in consultation with the Department of Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.

1[SCHEDULE C

(See rules 23, 61 and 76 and Part X)

Biological and Special Products

1. Sera.
2. Solution of serum proteins intended for injection.
2[3. Vaccines for parenteral injections.
4. Toxins.
5. Antigen.
6. Antitoxins.
Neo-arsphenamine and analogous substances used for the specific treatment of infective diseases.
8. Insulin.
9. Pituitary (Posterior Lobe) Extract.
10. Adrenaline and Solutions of Salts of Adrenaline.
3[11. Antibiotics and preparations thereof in a form to be administered parenterally.] 4[12 Any other preparation which is meant for parenteral administration as such or after being made up with a solvent or medium or any other sterile product and which- (a) requires to be stored in a refrigerator; or (b) does not require to be stored in a refrigerator.]
13. Sterilized surgical ligature and sterilized surgical suture.
2[14. Bacteriophages.
5[15 Ophthalmic preparations.] 6[16 Sterile Disposable Devices for single use only.]

1. Amended by Notfn. No. F. 1-30/47-A, dt. 5-1-1950
2. Amended by Notfn. No. F. 1-8/60-D, dt. 31-8-1960
3. Subs. by No. G.S.R. 487(E) ,dt. 2.7.1984.
4. Amended by Notfn. No. F. 1-14/68-D, dt. 26-10-1968
5. Ins. by Notfn. No. G.S.R. 1242(E) ,dt. 17.9.1979
6. Ins. by Notfn. No. G.S.R. 109(E) ,dt. 22.2.1994.

1[SCHEDULE C (1) (See Rule 23, 61 and 76)

Other Special Products

1 Drugs belonging to the Digitalis group and preparations containing drugs belonging to the Digitals group not in a form to be administered parenterally.

2 Ergot and preparations containing Ergot not in a form to be administered parenterally.

Adrenaline and preparations containing Adrenaline not in a form to be administered parenterally.
4 Fish Liver Oil and preparations containing Fish Liver Oil.

Vitamins and preparations containing any vitamins not in a form to be administered parenterally.

Liver extract and preparations containing liver extract not in a form to be administered parenterally.

Hormones and preparations containing Hormones not in a form to be administered parenterally.

8 Vaccine not in a form to be administered parenterally.

2[9. Antibiotics and preparations thereof not in a form to be administered parenterally.] 3[10. In-vitro Blood Grouping Sera.

11. In-vitro Diagnostic Devices for HIV, HbsAg and HCV.]

1. Amended by. Notfn. No. F. 1-22/59-D, dt. 9-4-1960
2. Subs. by.G.S.R.487(E) ,dt. 2-7-1984.

SCHEDULE D [See Rule 43]

Class of drugs Extent and conditions of exemption Substances not intended for All provisions of Chapter III of the Act and rules medicinal use thereunder subject to the condition that if the substance is imported in bulk, the importer shall certify that the substance is imported for nonmedicinal uses, and if imported otherwise than in bulk, each container shall bear a label indicating that the substance is not intended for medicinal use or is of commercial quality.
1[Further, permission from licensing authority as defined in clause (b) of rule 21 has to be obtained for import of the substance for non-medicinal use without registration and import license.]

2[***] 3[***]

4[5.
(i) The following substances, which are used both as articles of food as well as drugs:- All condensed or powdered milk whether pure, skimmed or malted, fortified with vitamins and minerals.
All provisions of Chapter III of the Act and rules thereunder.
(ii) Farex, Oats, Lactose and all other similar cereal preparations whether fortified with vitamins or otherwise excepting those for parenteral use.
(iii) (iv) Virol, Bovril, Chicken essence and all other similar predigested foods.

Ginger, Pepper, Cumin, Cinnamon and all other similar spices and condiments unless they are specifically labelled as conforming to the standards in the 5[Indian Pharmacopoeia or the official pharmacopoeias and the official compendia of the drug standards prescribed under the Act and rules made thereunder].

1. Ins. By G.S.R 724 (E), dt:7-11-2013.
2. Serial no 2, 3, omitted by Notfn. No. F-1-6/62-D (S.O.2889), dt: 2-7-1969.
3. Serial no 4, omitted by G.S.R.604 (E) ,dt. 24-8-2001
4. Amended by Notfn. F. 1-53/55-D, dt. 7.1.1957.
5.Amended by G.S.R. 19, dt: 15-12-1977.

Class of drugs Extent and conditions of exemption 1[6.

2[7.

Drugs and cosmetics imported

for manufacture and export by units situated in ―Special Economic Zones‖ as notified by the Government of India from time to time.

Custom Made Devices

The provisions of Chapter III of the Act and rules thereunder which required them to be covered by an import licence, import registration and import through notified port of entry, subject to the conditions that these drugs and cosmetics shall not be diverted for sale in the country:
Provided that such imported drugs and cosmetics may be permitted to the domestic area if they meet the requirements of standard procedure for import and registration as required under Chapter III of the Act and rules thereunder.
All provisions of Chapter III of the Act and the rules made thereunder, subject to the condition that the device is specifically made in accordance with a duly qualified medical practitioner‘s written prescription under his responsibility, in accordance with specific design characteristics and is intended for the sole use of a particular patient and the label should bear the word ―custom made device.‖ Explanation.––Mass produced devices which only need adoption to meet the specific requirements of the medical practitioner or any other professional user shall not be considered to be custom made devices.]

2. Ins. By G.S.R 690 (E) dated 25-09-2014.

1[SCHEDULE D(I)

(See rule 21 (d) and rule 24 A)

Information and undertaking required to be submitted by the manufacturer or his authorized agent with the Application Form for a Registration Certificate. The format shall be properly filled in for each application in Form 40. The detailed information, secret in nature, may be furnished on a Computer Floppy.

1. Particulars of the manufacturer and manufacturing premises
1.1 Name and address of the manufacturing premises (Telephone No., Fax No., E-mail address) to be registered.
1.2 Name(s) and address(es) of the Proprietor /Partners / Directors.
1.3 Name and address of the authorized Agent in India, responsible for the business of the manufacturer.
1.4 A brief profile of the manufacturer‘s business activity, in domestic as well as global market.

1.5 A copy of Plant Master File (duly notarised)

1.6 A copy of Plant Registration / approval Certificate issued by the Ministry of Health/National Regulatory Authority of the foreign country concerned (duly notarised)

1.7 A brief profile of the manufacturer‘s research activity.

2. Particulars of the manufactured drugs to be registered under Registration Certificate.

2.1 Names of drugs (Bulk/Formulation/Special product) to be registered meant for import into and use in India.
2.2 A copy of the approved list showing the bulk drugs/formulations/special products mentioned in 2.1 above are permitted for manufacturing / marketing in the country of origin (duly notarized).

2.3 2[A copy of Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) certificate as per WHO – GMP guidelines or Certificate of Pharmaceutical Products (CPP) or written confirmation for active substances exported to European Union which is equivalent to GMP certificate issued as per WHO – GMP guidelines, by the National Regulatory Authority of the country of origin or a copy of the certificate equivalent to GMP certificate as per WHO GMP guidelines issued by National Regulator of United States of America or Japan or Australia or Canada or the European Union for the purpose of marketing of the drugs in their country, in relation to bulk drugs or formulations or special product meant for import into India.]

2.4 The domestic prices of the drugs to be registered in India, in the currency of the country of origin.

2.5 The name(s) of the drug(s) which are original research products of the manufacturer.

Ins. by G.S.R. No.604(E) , dt. 24-8-2001 (w.e.f. 1-1-2003).
Subs. by G.S.R. No. 897(E) , dt. 21-9-2016.

3. Undertaking to declare that: -

3.1. We shall comply with all the conditions imposed on the Registration Certificate, read with rules 74 and 78 of the Drugs and Cosmetics rules, 1945.

3.2 We declare that we are carrying on the manufacture of the drugs mentioned in this Schedule, at the premises specified above, and we shall from time to time report any change of premises on which manufacture will be carried on and in cases where manufacture is carried on in more than one factory any change in the distribution of functions between the factories.

3.3 We shall comply with the provisions of Part IX of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.

3.4 Every drug manufactured by us for import under the Registration Certificate into India shall be as regard strength, quality and purity conforms with the provisions of Chapter III of Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Part IV of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules 1945, and their amendments from time to time.

3.5 We shall from time to time report for any change or manufacturing process, or in packaging, or in labelling, or in testing, or in documentation of any of the drugs, pertaining to the Registration Certificate, to be granted to us. Where any change in respect of any of the drugs under the Registration Certificate has taken place, in respect of any of the above matters, we shall inform the same to the licensing authority in writing within 30 days from the date of such changes.
In such cases, where there will be any major change/modification in manufacturing or in processing or in testing, or in documentation, as the case may be, at the discretion of the licensing authority, we shall obtain necessary approval within 30 days by submitting a separate application, alongwith the registration fee as specified in clause (ii) of sub rule (3) of rule 24-A.

3.6 We shall from time to time report for any administrative action taken due to adverse reaction, viz. market withdrawal regulatory restriction, or cancellation of authorization and/or ―not of standard quality report‖ of any drug pertaining to the Registration Certificate declared by any Regulatory Authority of any country where the drug is marketed/sold or distributed. The despatch and marketing of the drug in such cases, shall be stopped immediately and the licensing authority shall be informed immediately. Further action in respect of stop marketing of drug shall be taken as per the directions of the licensing authority. In such cases, action equivalent to that taken with reference to the concerned drug(s) in the country of origin or in the country of marketing will be followed in India also, in consultation with the licensing authority. The licensing authority may direct any further modification to this course of action, including the withdrawal of the drug from Indian market within 48 hours time period.

3.7 We shall comply with such further requirements, if any, as may be specified, by the Government of India, under the Act and the rules made there under.

3.8 We shall allow the licensing authority and/or any person authorized by him in that behalf to enter and inspect the manufacturing premises and to examine the process/procedure and documents in respect of any drug manufactured by us for which the application for Registration Certificate has been made.

3.9 We shall allow the licensing authority or any person authorized by him in that behalf to take samples of the drugs concerned for test, analysis or examination, if considered necessary by the licensing authority.

Place:
Date:

Signature of the manufacturer 1 [or his authorized agent] Seal / Stamp

SCHEDULE D(II) [See rule 21 (d) and rule 24 A]

Information required to be submitted by the manufacturer or his authorized agent with the Application Form for the registration of a bulk drug/formulation/special product for its import into India.
The format shall be properly filled in and the detailed information, secret in nature, may be furnished on a Computer Floppy

1. GENERAL

1.1. Name of the drug/formulation/special product, a brief description and the therapeutic class to which it belongs.
1.2 Regulatory status of the drug. Free Sale Certificate and/or Certificate of Pharmaceutical Products (CPP) issued by the Regulatory Authority of the country of origin. Free sale approval issued by the Regulatory Authorities of other major countries.
1.3 Drugs Master File (DMF) for the drug to be registered (duly notarised).
1.4 1[GMP certificate as per WHO-GMP format, or Certificate of Pharmaceutical Products (CPP), or written confirmation for active substances exported to the European Union which is equivalent to GMP certificate issued as per WHO – GMP guidelines, by the National Regulatory Authority of the country of origin or a duly notarised copy of the certificate equivalent to GMP certificate as per WHO-GMP guidelines issued by United States of America or Japan or Australia or Canada or the European Union for the purpose of marketing of the drug in their country.]
1.5 List of countries where marketing authorization or import permission for the said drug is granted with date (respective authorisation shall be enclosed).
1.6 List of countries where marketing authorisation or import permission for the said drug is cancelled/withdrawn with date.
1.7 List of countries where marketing authorisation or import permission for the said drug is pending since (date).
1.8 Domestic price of the drug in the currency followed in the country of origin.
1.9 List of countries where the said drug is patented.

2. CHEMICAL AND PHARMACEUTICAL INFORMATION OF DRUGS.
2.1 Chemical name.
Code name or number, if any.
Non-proprietary or generic name, if any.
Structure.
Physico-chemical properties.
2.2 Dosage form and its composition.
Qualitative and Quantitative composition in terms of the active substances(s) and excipient(s). List of active substance(s) separately from the constituent(s) of excipients.

2.3 Specifications of active and inactive ingredient (s) including pharmacopoeial references.
2.4 Source of active ingredient(s), name and address.

2.5 Tests for identification of the active ingredient(s), Method of its assays and tests for impurity profile with reference standards for the impurities (Protocol to be submitted alongwith reference standards for the impurities / relative substances).
2.6 Outline method and flow chart of manufacture of the bulk drug or finished formulation or special product.
2.7 Detailed test protocol for the drug with pharmacopoeial reference or in- house specification as approved by the registration authority, in the country of origin.

2.8 Stability data including accelerated stability and real time stability analysis.

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 897 (E), dt. 21.9.2016.

2.9 Documentation on pack size.
2.10 Numerical expression on EAN bar code on the labels and cartons,
2.11 Safety documents on containers and closures.
2.12 Documentation on storage conditions.
2.13 Three samples of medicinal product/drug and outlet packing are to be submitted with batch certificates. Additional samples as well as reference substances with batch certificates including date of manufacture, shelf life, and storage conditions of reference substance may be required both during registration procedure and during validity of registration decision.
2.14 Batch test reports/certificate of five consecutive production batches in details of the medicinal product are to be submitted for every site of manufacturing premises.
2.15 Manner of labelling as per rule 96 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules 1945.
2.16 Package insert.
2.17 Details of safety handling procedure of the drug.
2.18 Details of PMS study report for marketing period not exceeding five years.
.

3. BIOLOGICAL AND BIOPHARMACEUTICAL INFORMATION OF DRUGS

3.1 Biological control tests applied on the starting material, if applicable.
3.2 Biological control tests applied on the intermediate products, if applicable.
3.3 Biological control tests applied on the finished medical products, if applicable.
3.4 Stability of the finished products in terms of biological potency of the drug, if applicable.
3.5 Sterility tests, if applicable, specification and protocol therein.
3.6 Pyrogen tests, if applicable, specification and protocol therein.
3.7 Acute and sub-acute toxicity tests, if applicable specification and protocol therein.
3.8 Bio-availability studies and bio-equivalence data, if applicable.
3.9 Data relating to the environmental risk assessment for r-DNA products.
3.10 Other information relevant under the section.

4. PHARMACOLOGICAL AND TOXICOLOGICAL INFORMATION OF DRUGS.

Executive summary of the product is to be submitted mentioning the specific and general pharmacological actions of the drug and pharmacokinetic studies on absorption, metabolism, distribution and excretion. A separate note is to be given on acute and sub-acute toxicity studies and long term toxicity studies. Specific studies on reproductive toxicity, local toxicity and carcinogenic activity of the drug is to be elaborated, as far as possible.

5 CLINICAL DOCUMENTATION

A new drug as defined under rule 122-E of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 is required to be permitted separately by the licensing authority under rule 122-A of the said rules prior to its registration. Such a new drug requires a brief summary and clinical documentation, alongwith permission under 122-A of the said rules for its Registration Certificate.

6. LABELLING AND PACKAGING INFORMATION OF DRUGS.

6.1 Labels should conform as per the specifications under the Drugs and Cosmetics

Rules 1945.

6.2 Package insert should be in English and shall indicate the following therapeutic indications: - Posology and method of administration.
Contra-indications.
Special warnings and special precautions for use, if any.
Interaction with other medicaments and other forms of interaction.
Pregnancy and lactation, if contra-indicated.
Effects on ability to drive and use machines, if contra-indicated.
Undesirable effects/side effects.
Antidote for overdosing.
6.3 Package insert should indicate the following pharmaceutical information: -

List of excipients.
Incompatibilities.
Shelf life in the medical product as packaged for sale.
Shelf life after dilution or reconstitution according to direction.
Shelf life after first opening the container.
Special precautions for storage.
Nature and specification of the container.
Instructions for use/handling.

7 SPECIFIC INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR THE SPECIAL PRODUCTS (to be supplied, separately in Annexures, as ̳A‘, ̳B‘ and ̳C‘)

The information submitted above is true to the best of my knowledge and belief.

Place:
Date :

Signature of the manufacturer 1 [or his authorized agent] Seal/Stamp

NB:
1. Any change in the process of manufacture, method of testing, labelling, packaging, designing of the sale pack, medical literature and documentation is to be intimated to the licensing authority forthwith and permission to be obtained from him within 30 days time period.

2. Information relating to Serial No.4 and Serial No.5 are not applicable for drugs figuring in Indian Pharmacopoeia and also for the drugs figuring in United States of Pharmacopoeia, European Pharmacopoeia, and British Pharmacopoeia provided such drugs have already been approved for marketing in India for the applicant under rules 122A, 122B, 122C or 122D of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules 1945.

1.Ins. by G.S.R. 35(E), dt. 20.1.2005.

ANNEXURE A (See Schedule D-II, item No.7)

INFORMATION TO BE SUBMITTED IN SCHEDULE D-II SPECIFIC INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR THE BLOOD PRODUCTS A product dossier showing the:
Details of source Plasma, its viral screening, storage and transport from Collection Centres to Fractionation Centre. Regulatory status of Collection Centres.

2. Details of Fractionation Centre, Regulatory Status, Method of Fractionation and Control Processes.

Details of viral inactivation process for enveloped and non-enveloped virus(es) and viral validation studies to assess the viral load of the product. Testing of viral screening at any stage is to be highlighted with the details of the kits used with their respective sensitivity and specificity.

Bulk filtration prior to pharmaceutical packing giving the full details of Micro-filtration or nanofiltration followed.

5. Complete details of pharmaceutical processing and utilization.

Test protocol of the product showing the specifications and pharmacopoeial method followed for various testing parameters.
Specific batch test report for at least 3 batches showing the specifications of each testing parameter.

7. Pack size and labelling.

8. Product insert.

Specimen Batch Release Certificate issued by the National Regulatory Authority of the country of origin.

Specific processings like safe handling, material control, area control, pasteurization, stability studies, storage at quarantine stage and finished stage and packaging should be highlighted in the product dossier.

The information submitted above is true to the best of my knowledge and belief.

Place:
Date:

Signature of the manufacturer Seal / Stamp

NB: 1. Any change in the process of manufacture, method of testing, labelling, packaging, designing of the sale pack, medical literature and documentation is to be intimated to the licensing authority forthwith and permission to be obtained from him within 30 days time period.

ANNEXURE-B

(See Schedule D-II, item No.7)

INFORMATION TO BE SUBMITTED IN SCHEDULE D-II SPECIFIC
INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR THE DIAGNOSTIC KITS

A Product dossier showing the :

1. The details of source antigen or antibody as the case may be and characterization of the same. Process control of coating of antigen or antibody on the base material like Nitrocellulose paper, strips or cards or ELISA wells etc.

Detailed composition of the kit and manufacturing flow chart process of the kit showing the specific flow diagram of individual components or source of the individual components.

2. Test protocol of the kit showing the specifications and method of testing. In house evaluation report of sensitivity, specificity and stability studies carried out by the manufacturer.

3. The report of evaluation in details conducted by the National Control Authority of country of origin.

Specimen batch test report for at least consecutive 3 batches showing specification of each testing parameter.

4. The detailed test report of all the components used/packed in the finished kit.

5. Pack size and labelling.

6. Product insert.

Specific evaluation report, if done by any laboratory in India, showing the sensitivity and specificity of the kit.

Specific processing like safe handling, material control, area control, process control, stability studies, storage at quarantine stage and finished stage, packaging should be highlighted in the product dossier.

The information submitted above is true to the best of my knowledge and belief.

Place:
Date:

Signature of the manufacturer Seal / Stamp

NB: 1.Any change in the process of manufacture, method of testing, labelling, packaging, designing of the sale pack, medical literature and documentation is to be intimated to the licensing authority forthwith and permission to be obtained from him within 30 days time period.

ANNEXURE-C

(See Schedule D-II, item No.7)

INFORMATION TO BE SUBMITTED IN SCHEDULE D-II

SPECIFIC INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR VACCINES

A Product dossier showing the:

1. History, source, date of receipt, storage, identity and characterization of the seed strain.

2. Detailed flow chart of manufacturing process showing all the details of in-process control on toxicity, potency study and stability data of the final bulk and the final finished product including the storage temperature.

3. Complete details of chemical and pharmaceutical data for the product.
Composition and dosage form – method of manufacture with detailed flow chart – control of starting material – control tests on intermediate and finished products – certificate of analysis of finished products – validation of critical manufacturing steps.

4. Test protocol of the vaccines showing the specification and method of testing including pharmacopoeial specification.

5. Specimen batch test report for at least consecutive three batches showing the specification of each testing parameter.

6. The detailed test reports of all the components used / packed in the finished vaccine.

7. Pack-size and labelling.

8. Product insert

9. Specimen batch release certificates issued by the National Regulatory Authority of the country of origin.

10. Summary of pre-clinical and clinical data including :

(a) Prescribing information.
(b) Pharmacological and toxicological data pertaining to tests on animals Characterisation of immuno response and safety study in human use, in specific conditions.

Specific information on source of seed strain, its characterization, inactivation, etc. and processings like safe handling, material control, area control, process control, stability studies, storage at quarantine stage and finished state, packaging should be highlighted in the product dossier.
Specimen production and quality control protocols for at least three consecutive lots showing the specifications for each quality control parameter including pharmacopoeial requirement shall be submitted for study.
The information submitted above is true to the best of my knowledge and belief.
Place:
Date:

Signature of the manufacturer Seal / Stamp

NB:
1. Any change in the process of manufacture, method of testing, labelling, packaging, designing of the sale pack, medical literature and documentation is to be intimated to the licensing authority forthwith and permission to be obtained from him within 30 days time period.

2. All vaccines shall be new drugs unless certified otherwise by the liencesing authority approved under rule 21 of the Drugs and Cosmetic Rules, 1945. A copy of approval of the vaccine issued by the said licensing authority is to be enclosed, prior to issue of Registration Certificate of the said vaccines.

1[SCHEDULE D (III) (See rule 129 A) INFORMATION AND UNDERTAKING REQUIRED TO BE SUBMITiED BY THE MANUFACTURER OR HIS AUTHORISED IMPORTER/DISTRIBUTOR/AGENT WITH THE APPLICATION FORM FOR A REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE.

(The format shall be properly filled in for each application in form 42)

1. PARTICULARS OF THE MANUFACTURER AND MANUFACTURING PREMISES.- (a) Name and address of the manufacturer and manufacturing premises to be registered along with telephone numbers, Fax numbers and e-mail address.
(b) Name(s) and address of the Partners/Directors.
(c) Name and address of the authorised importer/distributor/agent in India, responsible for the business of the manufacturer.
(d) A brief profile of the manufacturer ‘s business activity, in domestic as well as global market.
2. PARTICULARS OF THE COSMETICS TO B E RE G IST E RED UNDER REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE.- (a) Names of cosmetics along with their brands name, category, pack sizes and variants to be registered and meant for import into and use in India.
(b) Particulars of the manufacturing licenses/registration/marketing authorizations (if any) under which the cosmetics are being manufactured in the country of origin along with the copy of the licenses/ marketing authorization/registration issued by the Regulatory Authority of that country.
(c) List of countries where marketing authorization or import permission for the said cosmetic has been granted.
3. CHEMICAL INFORMATION OF COSMETICS.- (a) Name(s) of ingredients in the nomenclature of standard references, along with percentages contained in the cosmetic.
(b) Specification and testing method for testing of the cosmetic(s).
(c) Manner of labelling as per Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.
(d) Package insert (if any).

4. UNDERTAKINGTO DECLARETHAT.- (a) We shall comply with all the conditions imposed on the Registration Certificate for the import of cosmetics as required under the provisions of Drugs and Cosmetics rules, 1945.
(b) We declare that we are carrying on the manufacture of the cosmetics mentioned in this Schedule, at the premises specified above, and we shall from time to time report any change of premises on which manufacture will be carried on and in cases where manufacture is carried on in more than one factory any change in the distribution of functions between the factories.
(c) We shall comply with the provisions of Part XIII of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.
(d) Every cosmetic manufactured by us for import under the Registration Certificate into India shall conform to the specifications given in the Drugs & Cosmetics Rules, 1945 as amended from time to time.
(e) We shall inform to the licensing authority, within 30 days in the event of any change in variants or in category or in manufacturing location or in labelling or in documentation of any of the cosmetic pertaining to the certificate to be granted to us.

1. Ins. By G.S.R. 426 (E) dated 19-05-2010, read with corrigendum G.S.R. 263(E) dated 30-05-2011, corrigendum G.S.R. dated 29-09-2011, corrigendum G.S.R. 270(E) dated 30-03-2012 and corrigendum G.S.R. 733(E), dated 29-09-2012.

(f) We shall from time to time report for any administrative action taken due to adverse reaction, viz.
market withdrawals/regulatory restriction, or cancellation of authorisation and/or ―not of standard quality report‖ of any cosmetic pertaining to the Registration Certificate declared by any Regulatory Authority of any country where the cosmetic is marketed/sold or distributed. The despatch and marketing of the cosmetic in such cases, shall be stopped and the licensing authority shall be informed immediately.
(g) We shall comply with such further requirements, if any, as may be specified, by the Government of India, under the Act and the Rules, made thereunder.
(h) We shall allow the licensing authority or any person authorised by him in that behalf to take samples of the cosmetics for testing if considered necessary by the licensing authority.

The information submitted above is true to the best of my/our knowledge and belief.
Place:
Date:
Signature of the manufacturer or his authorized agent Seal/Stamp.
1[***] 2[SCHEDULE E(1)

[See rule 161 (2)] List of poisonous substances under the Ayurvedic (including Siddha) and Unani Systems of Medicine A. AYURVEDIC SYSTEM I Drugs of vegetable origin

Ahipena (Except seeds) Papaver somniferum Linn.

Arka Calotropis procera (Ait.) R.Br. ex.

Bhallataka Semecarpus anacardium Linn. F.

Bhanga (Except seeds) Cannabis sativa Linn. (Except seeds)

Danti Baliospermum montanum Mull. Arg.

Dhattura Datura metal Linn..

Gunja (seed) Abrus precatorium Linn. (seed)

Jaipala (seed) Croton tiglium Linn.

Karaveera Rerium indicum Mill.

Langali Gloriosa superba Linn.

Parasika Yavani Hyoscyamus niger Linn.

Vatsanabha Vishamushti Acontium chasmanthum Stapf ex Holm.
Strychnox nuxvomica Linn.

Shringivisha Acontium chasmanthum Stapf ex Holm.
II Drugs of Animal Origin.

Sarpa Visha Snake poison.
III

Drugs of Mineral Origin Gauripashana Arsenic.

Hartala Arseno sulphide.

Manahashila Arseno sulphide.

Parada Mercury.

Rasa Karpura Hydrargyri subchloridum.

Tuttha Copper sulphate.

Hingula Cinnabar.

1 ―Schedule E‖ omitted No.G.S.R. 462(E),dt 22-6-1982.

B. SIDDHA SYSTEM Abini Papaver somniferum Linn.
Alari Nerium indicum Mill.
Attru thummatti Citrullus colocynthis (L.) Schrad Umathai Datura stramonium Linn.
Etti Stychnos nux vomica Linn.
Ganja (except seed) Cannabis sativa Linn.
Kalappaki Kizahangu Glorisa superba Linn.
Kodikkalli (exempted for external use) Euphorbia tirucalli Linn.
Kattu Thumatti Cucumis trigonus Roxb.

Kunri (except root) Arbus precatorius Linn.
Cheramkottai Semecarpus anacardium Linn f.
Thillai Exoecoria agallocha Linn.
Nabi Aconitum ferox Wall.
Nervalam Croton tiglium Linn.
Pugaielai Nicotiana tabacum Linn.
Mancevikkalli Euphorbia species

C. UNANI SYSTEM I Drugs of vegetable origin
1. Afiyun (except seed) Papaver somniferum Linn.
2. Bazrul-banj Hyoscyamus niger Linn.
3. Bish Aconitum chasmanthum Strapfex Holmes.
4. Bhang Cannabis sativa Linn.
5. Charas Canabis sativa Linn.
6. Dhatura seeds Datura metal Linn (seeds).
7. Kuchla Strychnos nuxvomica Linn.
8. Shokran Conium maculatum Linn.

II Drugs of Animal origin

9. Sanp (head) Snake (head).
10. Telni makkhi Mylabris cichori Linn.
Mylabaris pustulata Thund.
Mylabris macilenta .
III Drugs of Mineral origin Darchikna Hydrargryi perchloridum.
Hira Diamond.
Ras Kapoor Hydrargryi Subchloridum (calomel).
Shingruf Hydrargryi bisulphuratum.
Zangar Cupri subacetas.
Sammul-Far

(Abyaz, Asfar, Aswad and Ahmar) (white, yellow, black and red, Arsenic).
Tootiya Copper Sulphate Para Hydrargyrum.
Hartal Arsenic trisulphide (yellow).]

SCHEDULE F (See rule 78 and Part X)

1[***]

2[PART XII B

REQUIREMENTS FOR THE FUNCTIONING AND OPERATION OF A BLOOD BANK AND / OR FOR PREPARATION OF BLOOD COMPONENTS.
I. BLOOD BANKS / BLOOD COMPONENTS

A. GENERAL

Location and Surroundings : The blood bank shall be located at a place which shall be away from open sewage, drain, public lavatory or similar unhygienic surroundings.

Building : The building (s) used for operation of a blood bank and/or preparation of blood components shall be constructed in such a manner so as to permit the operation of the blood bank and preparation of blood components under hygienic conditions and shall avoid the entry of insects, rodents and flies.
It shall be well lighted, ventilated and screened (mesh), wherever necessary.
The walls and floors of the rooms, where collection of blood or preparation of blood components or blood products is carried out shall be smooth, washable and capable of being kept clean. Drains shall be of adequate size and where connected directly to a sewer, shall be equipped with traps to prevent back siphonage.

Health, clothing and sanitation of staff: The employees shall be free from contagious or infectious diseases. They shall be provided with clean overalls, head-gears, foot-wears and gloves, wherever required. There shall be adequate, clean and convenient hand washing and toilet facilities.

B. ACCOMMODATION FOR A BLOOD BANK.

A blood bank shall have an area of 100 square meters for its operations and an additional area of 50 square meters for preparation of blood components. It shall be consisting of a room each for –

(1) registration and medical examination with adequate furniture and facilities for registration and selection of donors;

(2) blood collection (air-conditioned);

1. Part I to Part XIIA omitted by G.S.R. 663 (E), dated 03-07-1992 corrected vide corrigendum G.S.R.
27(E) dated 22-01-1993.
2. Part XIIB and Part XIIC, were sub. By G.S.R. 245 (E) dated 05-04-1999, previously Part XIIB and XIIC, were substituted for Part XIIB by G.S.R. 28(E) dated 22-01-1992 and before that Part XIIB was added by notification number F 1-17/67-D, 24-06-1967.

(3) blood component preparation. (This shall be air-conditioned to maintain temperature between 20 degree centigrade to 25 degree centigrade);

(4) laboratory for blood group serology (air-conditioned);

(5) laboratory for blood transmissible diseases like Hepatitis, Syphilis, Malaria, HIV-antibodies (air-conditioned);

(6) sterilization-cum-washing;
(7) refreshment-cum-rest room (air-conditioned);
(8) store-cum-records.
NOTES :

(1) The above requirements as to accommodation and area may be relaxed, in respect of testing laboratories and sterilization-cum-washing room, for reasons to be recorded in writing by the Licensing Authority and/or the Central Licence Approving Authority, in respect of blood banks operating in hospitals, provided the hospital concerned has a pathological laboratory and a sterilization-cum-washing room common with other departments in the said hospital.

(2) Refreshments to the donor after phlebotomy shall be served so that he is kept under observation in the blood bank.

C PERSONNEL

staff:- Every blood bank shall have following categories of whole time competent technical

(a) Medical Officer, possessing the qualifications specified in condition (i) of rule 122-G.
(b) Blood Bank Technician(s) possessing – (i) Degree in Medical Laboratory Technology (M.L.T) with six months‘ experience in the testing of blood and/or its components; or

(ii) Diploma in Medical Laboratory Technology (M.L.T) with one year‘s experience in the testing of blood and / or its components, the degree or diploma being from a University / Institution recognized by the Central Government or State Government.

(c) Registered Nurse(s);
(d) Technical supervisor (where blood components are manufactured), possessing- (i) Degree in Medical Laboratory Technology (M.L.T) with six months‘ experience in the preparation of blood components; or

(ii) Diploma in Medical Laboratory Technology (M.L.T) with one year‘s experience in the preparation of blood components,

the degree or diploma being from a University / Institution recognized by the Central Government or State Government.

NOTES :

(1) The requirements of qualification and experience in respect of Technical Supervisor and Blood Bank Technician shall apply in the cases of persons who are approved by the Licensing Authority and/or Central Licence Approving Authority after the commencement of the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Rules, 1999*.

(2) As regards, the number of whole time competent technical personnel, the blood bank shall comply with the requirements laid down in the Directorate General of Health Services Manual.

(3) It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to ensure through maintenance of records and other latest techniques used in blood banking system that the personnel involved in blood banking activities for collection, storage, testing and distribution are adequately trained in the current Good Manufacturing Practices/Standard Operating Procedures for the tasks undertaken by each personnel. The personnel shall be made aware of the principles of Good Manufacturing Practices / Standard Operating Procedures that affect them and receive initial and continuing training relevant to their needs.

D. MAINTENANCE

The premises shall be maintained in a clean and proper manner to ensure adequate cleaning and maintenance of proper operations. The facilities shall include:-

(1) Privacy and thorough examination of individuals to determine their suitability as donors.
(2) Collection of blood from donors with minimal risk of contamination of exposure to activities and equipment unrelated to blood collection.

(3) Storage of blood or blood components pending completion of tests.
(4) Provision for quarantine, storage of blood and blood components in a designated location, pending repetition of those tests that initially give questionable serological results.

(5) Provision for quarantine, storage, handling and disposal of products and reagents not suitable for use.

(6) Storage of finished products prior to distribution or issue.

(7) Proper collection, processing, compatibility testing, storage and distribution of blood and blood components to prevent contamination.

(8) Adequate and proper performance of all procedures relating to plasmapheresis, plateletpheresis and leucapheresis.

(9) Proper conduct of all packaging, labelling and other finishing operations.
(10) Provision for safe and sanitary disposal of – (i) Blood and/or blood components not suitable for use, distribution or sale.

(ii) Trash and items used during the collection, processing and compatibility testing of blood and / or blood components.

*Note : 2nd Amendment Rules, 1999 (w.e.f. 5-4-1999)

E. EQUIPMENT

Equipment used in the collection, processing, testing, storage and sale/distribution of blood and its components shall be maintained in a clean and proper manner and so placed as to facilitate cleaning and maintenance. The equipment shall be observed, standardized and calibrated on a regularly scheduled basis as described in the Standard Operating Procedures Manual and shall operate in the manner for which it was designed so as to ensure compliance with the official requirements (the equipments) as stated below for blood and its components.

Equipment that shall be observed, standardized and calibrated with at least the following frequencies:

EQUIPMENT PERFORMANCE FREQUENCY FREQUENCY OF
CALIBRATION

1. Temperature Recorder Compare against thermometer Daily As often as necessary

Refrigerated centrifuge Observe speed and temperature Each day of use As often as necessary

Hematocrit centrifuge – – Standardise before initial use, after repair or adjustments and annually.
4, General lab.
Centrifuge – – Tachometer, every 6 months.
Automated typing Blood Observe controls for correct results Each day of use –

6. Haemoglobinometer Standardize against cyanamethemoglob ulin standard

−ditto− –

Refractiometer or Urinometer Standardize against distilled water − ditto − – Blood container weighing device Standardize against container of known − ditto – As often as necessary weight.

Water Bath Observe temperature − ditto − −ditto−

Rh view box (wherever necessary) –ditto– − ditto − − ditto−

Autoclave Observe temperature Each day of use As often as necessary

Serologic rotators Observe controls for correct results
-- ditto-- Speed as often as necessary.

Laboratory thermometers – – Before initial use

14 Electronic thermometers – Monthly –

Blood agitator Observe weight of the first container of blood filled for correct results Each day of use Standardize with container

of known mass or value

before initial use, and after repairs or adjustments.

F. SUPPLIES AND REAGENTS:

All supplies and reagents used in the collection, processing, compatibility, testing, storage and distribution of blood and blood components shall be stored at proper temperature in a safe and hygienic place, in a proper manner and in particular:–

(a) all supplies coming in contact with blood and blood components intended for transfusion shall be sterile, pyrogen-free, and shall not interact with the product in such a manner as to have an adverse effect upon the safety, purity, potency or effectiveness of the product.

(b) supplies and reagents that do not bear an expiry date shall be stored in a manner that the oldest is used first.

(c) supplies and reagents shall be used in a manner consistent with instructions provided by the manufacturer.

(d) all final containers and closures for blood and blood components not intended for transfusion shall be clean and free of surface solids and other contaminants.

(e) each blood collecting container and its satellite container(s), if any, shall be examined visually for damage or evidence of contamination prior to its use and immediately after filling. Such examination shall include inspection for breakage of seals, when indicated, and abnormal discoloration. Where any defect is observed, the container shall not be used or, if detected after filling, shall be properly discarded.

(f) representative samples of each lot of the following reagents and/or solutions shall be tested regularly on a scheduled basis by methods described in the Standard Operating Procedures Manual to determine their capacity to perform as required,

Reagents and solutions Frequency of testing alongwith controls Anti-human serum Blood grouping serums Each day of use Each day of use Lectin Each day of use Antibody screening and reverse grouping cells Each day of use Hepatitis test reagents Each run Syphilis serology reagents Each run Enzymes Each day of use HIV I and II reagents Each run Normal saline (LISS and PBS) Each day of use Bovine Albumin Each day of use.

G. GOOD MANUFACTURING PRACTICES (GMPs) /STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES (SOPs):

Written Standard Operating Procedures shall be maintained and shall include all steps to be followed in the collection, processing, compatibility testing, storage and sale or distribution of blood and/or preparation of blood components for homologous transfusion, autologous transfusion and further manufacturing purposes. Such procedures shall be available to the personnel for use in the concerned areas. The Standard Operating Procedures shall inter alia include:

1. (a) criteria used to determine donor suitability.
(b)

(c) methods of performing donor qualifying tests and measurements including minimum and maximum values for a test or procedure, when a factor in determining acceptability;

solutions and methods used to prepare the site of phlebotomy so as to give maximum assurance of a sterile container of blood;
(d) method of accurately relating the product (s) to the donor;
(e) blood collection procedure, including in-process precautions taken to measure accurately the quality of blood drawn from the donor;
(f) methods of component preparation, including any time restrictions for specific steps in processing;
(g) all tests and repeat tests performed on blood and blood components during processing;
(h) pre-transfusion testing, wherever applicable, including precautions to be taken to identify accurately the recipient blood components during processing;

(i) procedures of managing adverse reactions in donor and recipient reactions:

(j) storage temperatures and methods of controlling storage temperatures for blood and its components and reagents;
(k) length of expiry dates, if any assigned for all final products;

(l) criteria for determining whether returned blood is suitable for re-issue;

(m) procedures used for relating a unit of blood or blood component from the donor to its final disposal;

(n) quality control procedures for supplies and reagents employed in blood collection, processing and re-transfusion testing;

(o) schedules and procedures for equipment maintenance and calibration;

(p) labelling procedures to safeguard its mix-ups, receipt, issue, rejected and in-hand;

(q) procedures of plasmapheresis, plateletphersis and leucapheresis if performed, including precautions to be taken to ensure re-infusion of donor‘s own cells;

(r) procedures for preparing recovered (salvaged) plasma if performed, including details of separation, pooling, labelling, storage and distribution;

(s) all records pertinent to the lot or unit maintained pursuant to these regulations shall be reviewed before the release or distribution of a lot or unit of final product. The review or portions of the review may be performed at appropriate periods during or after blood collection, processing, testing and storage. A thorough investigation, including the conclusions and follow-up, of any unexplained discrepancy or the failure of a lot or unit to meet any of its specification shall be made and recorded.

(2) A licensee may utilise current Standard Operating Procedures, such as the Manuals of the following organizations, so long as such specific procedures are consistent with, and at least as stringent as, the requirements contained in this Part, namely :-

(i) Directorate General of Health Services Manual.

(ii) Other Organisations or individual blood bank‘s manuals, subject to the approval of State Licensing Authority and Central Licence Approving Authority.

H. CRITERIA FOR BLOOD DONATION:

Conditions for donation of blood:

(1) General – No person shall donate blood and no blood bank shall draw blood from a person, more than once in three months. The donor shall be in good health, mentally alert and physically fit and shall not be inmates of jail, persons having multiple sex partners and drug-addicts. The donors shall fulfil the following requirements, namely: -

1[(a) the donor shall be in the age group of 18 to 65 years;] (b) the donor shall not be less than 45 kilograms;
( c) temperature and pulse of the donor shall be normal;
(d ) the systolic and diastolic blood pressure are within normal limits without medication;
(e) haemoglobin which shall not be less than 12.5 grams;
(f) the donor shall be free from acute respiratory diseases;
(g) the donor shall be free from any skin diseases at the site of phlebotomy;
(h) the donor shall be free from any disease transmissible by blood transfusion, insofar as can be determined by history and examination indicated above;
(i) the arms and forearms of the donor shall be free from skin punctures or scars indicative of professional blood donors or addiction of self injected narcotics.

(2) Additional qualifications of donor – No person shall donate blood, and no blood bank shall draw blood from a donor, in the conditions mentioned in column (1) of the Table given below before the expiry of the period of deferment mentioned in the column (2) of the said Table.

Table: Deferment of blood donation

CONDITIONS PERIOD OF DEFERMENT (1) (2)_

(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (h) Abortions History of Blood transfusion Surgery Typhoid History of Malaria and duly treated Tattoo Breast feeding 6 months 6 months 12 months 12 months after recovery 2 months (endemic) 3 years (non endemic area) 6 months 12 months after delivery (i) (j) Immunization (Cholera, Typhoid, Diphtheria, Tetanus, Plague, Gammaglobulin) Rabies vaccination 15 days 1 year after vaccination (k) History of Hepatitis in family or close contact 12 months (l) Immunoglobulin 12 months

(3) No person shall donate blood and no blood bank shall draw blood from a person, suffering from any of the diseases mentioned below, namely:–

(a) Cancer (b) Heart disease

Subs. By G.S.R 101 (E), dt:18-2-2011

(c) Abnormal bleeding tendencies (d) Unexplained weight loss (e) Diabetes-controlled on insulin 1[(f) Hepatitis infection] (g) Chronic nephritis (h) Signs and symptoms, suggestive of AIDS (i ) Liver diseases (j) Tuberculosis (k) Polycythemia Vera.
(l) Asthma (m) Epilepsy (n) Leprosy (o) Schizophrenia (p) Endocrine disorders

I. GENERAL EQUIPMENTS AND INSTRUMENTS.

1. For blood collection room:
(i) Donor beds, chairs and tables: These shall be suitably and comfortably cushioned and shall be of appropriate size.
(ii) Bedside table (iii) Sphygmomanometer and stethoscope (iv) Recovery beds for donors.
(v) Refrigerators, for storing separately tested and untested blood, maintaining temperature between 2 to 6 degree centigrade with digital dial thermometer, recording thermograph and alarm device, with provision for continuous power supply.

(vi) Weighing devices for donor and blood containers.

2. For haemoglobin determination:

(i) Copper sulphate solution (specific gravity 1.053) (ii) Sterile lancet and impregnated alcohol swabs.
(iii) Capillary tube (1.3 x 1.4 x 96 mm for Pasteur pipettes) (iv) Rubber bulbs for capillary tubings.
(v) Sahli‘s haemoglobinometer / Colorimetric method.

3. For temperature and pulse determination.

(i) Clinical thermometers (ii) Watch (fitted with a second-hand) and a stop-watch.

4. For blood containers:

(a) Only disposable PVC blood bags shall be used (closed system) as per specifications of IP/USP/BP.

(b) Anti-coagulants: The anti-coagulant solution shall be sterile, pyrogen-free and of the following composition that will ensure satisfactory safety and efficacy of the whole blood and/or for all the separate blood components.

(i) Citrate Phosphate Dextrose Adenine solution (CPDA) or Citrate Phosphate Dextrose Adenine – 1 (CPDA-1) – 14 ml solution shall be required for

1. Subs. by G.S.R. No. 40(E), dated 29-01-2001.

100 ml of blood.

Note 1.- (i) In case of single/double/triple/quadruple blood collection bags used for blood component preparations, CPDA blood collection bags may be used.
(ii) Acid Citrate Dextrose solution (A.C.D. with Formula-A) I.P. – 15 ml solution shall be required for 100 ml of blood, (iii) Additive solutions such as SAGM, ADSOL, NUTRICEL may be used for storing and retaining Red Blood Corpuscles up to 42 days.

Note 2.- The licensee shall ensure that the anti-coagulant solutions are of a licensed manufacturer and the blood bags in which the said solutions are contained have a certificate of analysis of the said manufacturer.

5. Emergency equipments/items:

(i) Oxygen cylinder with mask, gauge and pressure regulator.
(ii) 5 per cent Glucose or Normal Saline.
(iii) Disposable sterile syringes and needles of various sizes.

(iv) Disposable sterile I.V. infusion sets.
(v) Ampoules of Adrenaline, Noradrenaline, Mephentin, Betamethasone or Dexamethasone, Metoclorpropamide injections.
(vi) Aspirin.

6. Accessories:

(i) Such as blankets, emesis basins, haemostats, set clamps, sponge forceps, gauze, dressing jars, solution jars, waste cans.
(ii) Medium cotton balls, 1.25 cm adhesive tapes.
(iii) Denatured spirit, Tincture Iodine, green soap or liquid soap.
(iv) Paper napkins or towels.
(v) Autoclave with temperature and pressure indicator.
(vi) Incinerator (vii) Stand-by generator

7. Laboratory equipment:

(i) Refrigerators, for storing diagnostic kits and reagents, maintaining a temperature between 4 to 6 degree centigrade (plus/minus 2 degrees centigrade) with digital dial thermometer having provision for continuous power supply.
(ii) Compound Microscope with low and high power objectives.
(iii) Centrifuge Table Model.
(iv) Water bath: having range between 37 degree centigrade to 56 degree centigrade.
(v) Rh viewing box in case of slide technique.
(vi) Incubator with thermostatic control.
(vii) Mechanical shakers for serological tests for Syphilis.
(viii) Hand-lens for observing tests conducted in tubes.
(ix) Serological graduated pipettes of various sizes.
(x) Pipettes (Pasteur).
(xi) Glass slides.

(xii) Test tubes of various sizes / micrometer plates (U or V type).
(xiii) Precipitating tubes 6mm x 50mm of different sizes and glass beakers of different sizes.
(xiv) Test tube racks of different specifications.
(xv) Interval timer electric or spring wound.
(xvi) Equipment and materials for cleaning glass wares adequately.
(xvii) Insulated containers for transporting blood, between 2 degree centigrade to 10 degree centigrade temperatures, to wards and hospitals.
(xviii) Wash bottles.
(xix) Filter papers.
(xx) Dielectric tube sealer.
(xxi) Plain and EDTA vials.
(xxii) Chemical balance (wherever necessary).
(xxiii) ELISA reader with printer, washer and micropipettes.

J. SPECIAL REAGENTS :

(1) Standard blood grouping sera Anti A, Anti B and Anti D with known controls.
Rh typing sera shall be in double quantity and each of different brand or if from the same supplier each supply shall be of different lot numbers.

(2) Reagents for serological tests for syphilis and positive sera for controls.
(3) Anti Human Globulin Serum (Coomb‘s serum).
(4) Bovine Albumin 22 percent Enzyme reagents for incomplete antibodies.
1[(5) ELISA or RPHA test kits for Hepatitis and HIV I & II.
(6) Detergent and other agents for cleaning laboratory glass wares.

K. TESTING OF WHOLE BLOOD :

(1) It shall be responsibility of the licensee to ensure that the whole blood collected, processed and supplied conforms to the standards laid down in the Indian Pharmacopoeia and other tests published, if any, by the Government.

(2) Freedom from HIV antibodies (AIDS) Tests. – Every licensee shall get samples of every blood unit tested, before use, for freedom from HIV 1 and HIV II antibodies either from laboratories specified for the purpose by the Central Government or in his own laboratory. The results of such testing shall be recorded on the label of the container.

(3) Each blood unit shall also be tested for freedom from 2[(Hepatitis B surface antigen and Hepatitis C Virus antibody)] VDRL and malarial parasite and results of such testing shall be recorded on the label of the container.

NOTES (a) Blood samples of donors in pilot tube and the blood samples of the Recipient shall be preserved for 7 days after issue.
(b) The blood intended for transfusion shall not be frozen at any stage.

(c) Blood containers shall not come directly in contact with ice at any stage.

L RECORDS :

The records which the licensee is required to maintain shall include inter alia the following particulars, namely:

(1) Blood donor record: It shall indicate serial number, date of bleeding, name, address and signature of donor with other particulars of age, weight, haemoglobin, blood grouping, blood pressure, medical examination, bag number and patient‘s detail for whom donated in case of replacement donation, category of donation (voluntary / replacement) and deferral records and signature of Medical Officer In-charge.

(2) Master records for blood and its components: It shall indicate bag serial number, date of collection, date of expiry, quantity in ml. ABO/Rh Group, results for testing of HIV I and HIV II antibodies, Malaria, V.D.R.L.
1[(Hepatitis B surface antigen and Hepatitis C Virus antibody)] and irregular antibodies (if any), name and address of the donor with particulars, utilization issue number, components prepared or discarded and signature of the Medical Officer in charge.

(3) Issue Register: It shall indicate serial number, date and time of issue bag serial number, ABO/RH Group, total quantity in ml, name and address of the recipient, group of recipient, unit/institution, details of cros-matching report, indication for transfusion.

(4 ) Records of components supplied: Quantity supplied; compatibility report, details of recipient and signature of issuing person.

(5) Records of ACD/CPD/CPD-A/SAGM bags giving details of manufacturer, batch number, date of supply, and results of testing.

(6) Register for diagnostic kits and reagents used: name of the kits/reagents, details of batch number, date of expiry and date of use.

(7) Blood bank must issue the cross matching report of the blood to the patient together with the blood unit.
(8) Transfusion adverse reaction records.

(9) Records of purchase, use and stock in hand of disposable needles, syringes, blood bags, shall be maintained.

NOTE : The above records shall be kept by the licensee for a period of five years.

M. LABELS :
The labels on every bag containing blood and/or component shall contain the following particulars, namely;

(1) The proper name of the product in a prominent place and in bold letters on the bag.
(2) Name and address of the blood bank

(3) Licence number

1 Subs. by G.S.R. 40(E), dt. 29.1.2001 (w.e.f. 1.6.2001).

(4) Serial number

(5) The date on which the blood is drawn and the date of expiry as prescribed under Schedule P to these rules.

(6) A colored label shall be put on every bag containing blood. The following color scheme for the said labels shall be used for different groups of blood:

Blood Group Colour of the label

O Blue A Yellow B Pink AB White

(7) The results of the tests for 1[(Hepatitis B surface antigen and Hepatitis C Virus antibody)] syphilis, freedom from HIV I and HIV II antibodies and malarial parasite.

(8) The Rh. Group.

(9) Total volume of blood, the preparation of blood, nature and percentage of anticoagulant.

(10) Keep continuously temperature at 2 degree centigrade to 6 degree centigrade for whole human blood and/or components as contained under III of Part XII B.
(11) Disposable transfusion sets with filter shall be used in administration equipment.
(12) Appropriate compatible cross-matched blood without atypical antibody in recipient shall be used.

(13) The contents of the bag shall not be used if there is any visible evidence of deterioration like haemolysis, clotting or discoloration.

(14) The label shall indicate the appropriate donor classification like ―Voluntary Donor‖ or ―Replacement Donor‖ in no less prominence than the proper name.

NOTES :

1. In the case of blood components, particulars of the blood from which such components have been prepared shall be given against item numbers (5), (7), (8), (9) and (14).

2. The blood and/or its components shall be distributed on the prescription of a Registered Medical Practitioner.

II. BLOOD DONATION CAMPS.

A blood donation camp may be organized by –

1. Subs. by G.S.R 40(E), dt. 29.1.2001.

(a) a licensed designated Regional Blood Transfusion Centre ; or

(b) a licensed Government blood bank; or

(c) the Indian Red Cross society; or

NOTES:
(i) ― Designated Regional Blood Transfusion Centre‖ shall be a center approved and designated by a Blood Transfusion Council constituted by a State Government to collect, process and distribute blood and its components to cater to the needs of the region and that center has also been licensed and approved by the Licensing Authority and Central Licence Approving Authority for the purpose.

(ii) The designated Regional Blood Transfusion Centre, Government blood bank and Indian Red Cross Society shall intimate within a period of seven days, the venue where the blood camp was held and details of group wise blood units collected in the said camp to the Licensing Authority and Central Licence Approving Authority.

For holding a blood donation camp, the following requirements shall be fulfilled/complied with, namely: -

(A) Premises, personnel etc.

(a) Premises under the blood donation camp shall have sufficient area and the location shall be hygienic so as to allow proper operation, maintenance and cleaning.

(b) All information regarding the personnel working, equipment used and facilities available at such a Camp shall be well documented and made available for inspection, if required, and ensuring -

(i) Continuous and uninterrupted electrical supply for equipment used in the Camp;
(ii) Adequate lighting for all the required activities;
(iii) Hand-washing facilities for staff;
(iv) Reliable communication system to the central office of the Controller/ Organizer of the Camp;
(v) Furniture and equipment arranged within the available space;
(vi) Refreshment facilities for donors and staff;
(vii) Facilities for medical examination of the donors;
(viii) Proper disposal of waste.

(B) Personnel for Out-door Blood Donation Camp:

To collect blood from 50 to 70 donors in about 3 hours or from 100 to 200 donors in 5 hours, the following requirements shall be fulfilled / complied with:

(i) one Medical Officer and two nurses or phlebotomists for managing 6-8 donor tables;
(ii) two medico social workers;
(iii) three blood bank technicians;
(iv) two attendants;

(v) vehicle having a capacity to seat 8-10 persons, with provision for carriage of donation goods including facilities to conduct a blood donation camp;

(C) Equipments :
1. BP apparatus.
2. Stethoscope.
3. Blood bags (single, double, triple, quadruple).
4. Donor questionnaire.
5. Weighing device for donors.
6. Weighing device for blood bags.
7. Artery forceps, scissors.
8. Stripper for blood tubing.
9. Bed sheets, blankets/mattress.
10. Lancets, swab stick/tooth picks.
11. Glass slides.
12. Portable Hb meter/copper sulphate.

13. Test tube (big) and 12x100mm (small).
14. Test tube stand.
15. Anti-A, Anti-B and Anti-AB, Antisera and Anti-D.
16. Test tube sealer film.

17. Medicated adhesive tape.
18. Plastic waste basket.
19. Donor cards and refreshment for donors.
20 Emergency medical kit.

Insulated blood bag containers with provisions for storing between 2 degree centigrade to 10 degree centigrade.
22. Dielectric sealer or portable tube sealer.
23. Needle destroyer (wherever necessary).

III. PROCESSING OF BLOOD COMPONENTS FROM WHOLE BLOOD BY A BLOOD
BANK

The Blood components shall be prepared by blood banks as a part of the Blood Bank services. The conditions for grant or renewal of licence to prepare blood components shall be as follows: -

A. ACCOMMODATION:

(1) Rooms with adequate area and other specification, for preparing blood components depending on quantum of workload shall be as specified in item B under the heading ―1. BLOOD BANKS/BLOOD COMPONENTS‘ of this Part.
(2) Preparation of Blood components shall be carried out only under closed system using single double, triple or quadruple plastic bags except for preparation of Red Blood Cells Concentrates, where single bags may be used with transfer bags.

B. EQUIPMENT :

(i) Air Conditioner;
(ii) Laminar air flow bench;
(iii) Suitable refrigerated centrifuge;
(iv) Plasma expresser;
(v) Clipper and clips and/or dielectric sealer;

(vi) Weighing device;
(vii) Dry rubber balancing material;
(viii) Artery forceps, scissors;
(ix) Refrigerator maintaining a temperature between 2 degree centigrade to 6 degree centigrade, a digital dial thermometer with recording thermograph and alarm device, with provision for continuous power supply;
(x) Platelet agitator with incubator (wherever necessary);
(xi) Deep freezers maintaining a temperature between minus 30 degree centigrade to minus 40 degree centigrade and minus 75 degree centigrade to minus 80 degree centigrade;
(xii) Refrigerated Water bath for Plasma Thawing;
(xiii) Insulated blood bag containers with provisions for storing at appropriate temperature for transport purposes;

C. PERSONNEL:
The whole time competent technical staff meant for processing of Blood Components (that is Medical Officer, Technical Supervisor, Blood Bank Technicians and Registered Nurse) shall be as specified in item C, under the heading ― 1. BLOOD BANKS/BLOOD COMPONENTS‖ of this Part.
D. TESTING FACILITIES:
General: Facilities for A, B, AB and O groups and Rh(D) grouping. 1[(Hepatitis B surface antigen and Hepatitis C Virus antibody)], VDRL, HIV I and HIV II antibodies and malarial parasites shall be mandatory for every blood unit before it is used for the preparation of blood components.
The results of such testing shall be indicated on the label.

E. CATEGORIES OF BLOOD COMPONENTS:
(1) CONCENTRATED HUMAN RED BLOOD CORPUSCLES:
The product shall be known as ―Packed Red Blood Cells‖ that is Packed Red Blood Cells remaining after separating plasma from human blood.

General Requirements:
(a) Storage: Immediately after processing, the Packed Red Blood Cells shall be kept at a temperature maintained between 2 degree centigrade to 6 degree centigrade.
(b) Inspection: The component shall be inspected immediately after separation of the plasma, during storage and again at the time of issue.
The product shall not be issued if there is any abnormality in color or physical appearance or any indication of microbial contamination.
(c) Suitability of Donor: The source of blood for Packed Red Blood Cells shall be obtained from a donor who meets the criteria for Blood Donation as specified in item H under the heading ―I. BLOOD BANKS/BLOOD COMPONENTS‖ of this Part.

(d) Testing of Whole Blood: Blood from which Packed Red Blood Cells are prepared shall be tested as specified in item K relating to Testing Of Whole Blood under the heading ―I. BLOOD BANKS/BLOOD COMPONENTS‖ of this Part.

(e) Pilot samples: Pilot samples collected in integral tubing or in separate pilot tubes shall meet the following specifications:

(i) One or more pilot samples of either the original blood or the Packed Red Blood Cells being processed shall be preserved with each unit of Packed Red Blood Cells which is issued.

(ii) Before they are filled, all pilot sample tubes shall be marked or identified so as to relate them to the donor of that unit or Packed Red Blood Cells.

(iii) Before the final container is filled or at the time the final product is prepared, the pilot samples tubes accompanying a unit of Packed Red Blood Cells, shall be attached in a tamper-proof manner that shall conspicuously identify removal and reattachment.

(iv) All pilot sample tubes, accompanying a unit of packed red blood cells, shall be filled immediately after the blood is collected or at the time the final product is prepared, in each case, by the person who performs the collection of preparation.

F. Processing:

(i) Separation: Packed Red Blood Cells shall be separated from the whole blood, --

(a) if the whole blood is stored in ACD solution within 21 days, and

(b) if the whole blood is stored in CPDA-1 solution, within 35 days, from the date of collection. Packed Red Blood Cells may be prepared either by centrifugation done in a manner that shall not tend to increase the temperature of the blood or by normal undisturbed sedimentation method. A portion of the plasma, sufficient to ensure optimal cell preservation, shall be left with the packed Red Blood Cells.

(ii) Packed Red Blood Cells Frozen: Cryophylactic substance may be added to the Packed Red Blood Cells for extended manufacturer‘s storage not warmer than minus 65 degree centigrade provided the manufacturer submits data to the satisfaction of the Licensing Authority and Central Licence Approving Authority, as adequately demonstrating through in-vivo cells survival and other appropriate tests that the addition of the substance, the material used and the processing methods results in a final product meets the required standards of safety, purity and potency for Packed Red Blood Cells, and that the frozen

product shall maintain those properties for the specified expiry period.

(iii) Testing: Packed Red Blood Cells shall conform to the standards as laid down in the Indian Pharmacopoeia.

(2) PLATELETS CONCENTRATES:

The product shall be known as ―Platelets Concentrates‖ that is platelets collected from one unit of blood and re-suspended in an appropriate volume of original plasma.

General Requirements:

(i) Source: The source material for platelets shall be platelet rich plasma or buffy coat which may be obtained from the whole blood or by plateletpheresis.

(ii) Processing :

(a) Separation of buffy-coat or platelet-rich plasma and platelets and resuspension of the platelets shall be in a closed system by centrifugal method with appropriate speed, force and time.

(b) Immediately after collection, the whole blood or plasma shall be held in storage between 20 degree centigrade to 24 degree centigrade. When it is to be transported from the venue of blood collection to the processing laboratory, during such transport action, the temperature as close as possible to a range between 20 degree centigrade to 24 degree centigrade shall be ensured. The platelet concentrates shall be separated within 6 hours after the time of collection of the unit of whole blood or plasma.

(c) The time and speed of centrifugation shall be demonstrated to produce an unclamped product, without visible haemolysis, that yields a count of not less than 3.5 x 1010 (3.5 x 10 raised to the power of 10) and 4.5 x 1010 (4.5 x 10 raised to the power ten) i.e. platelets per unit from a unit of 350 ml and 450 ml blood respectively. One percent of total platelets prepared shall be tested of which 75 per cent of the units shall conform to the above said platelet count.

(d) The volume of original plasma used for re-suspension of the platelets shall be determined by the maintenance of the pH of not less than 6 during the storage period. The pH shall be measured on a sample of platelets which has been stored for the permissible maximum expiry period at 20 degree centigrade to 24 degree centigrade.

(e) Final containers used for platelets shall be colorless and transparent to permit visual inspection of the contents. The caps selected shall maintain a hermetic seal to prevent contamination of the contents. The container material shall not interact with the contents, under the normal conditions of the storage and use, in such a manner as to have an adverse effect upon the safety, purity, potency, or efficacy of the product. At the time of filling, the final container shall be marked or identified by number so as to relate it to the donor.

(iii) Storage: Immediately after re-suspension, platelets shall be placed in storage not exceeding for a period of 5 days, between 20 degree centigrade to 24 degree centigrade, with continuous gentle agitation of the platelet concentrates maintained throughout such storage

(iv) Testing: The units prepared from different donors shall be tested at the end of the storage period for –

(a) Platelet count;

(b) pH of not less than 6 measured at the storage temperature of the unit;

(c) measurement of actual plasma volume;

(d) one percent of the total platelets prepared shall be tested for sterility;

(e) the tests of functional viability of the platelets shall be done by swirling movement before issue.

(f) if the results of the testing indicate that the product does not meet the specified requirements, immediate corrective action shall be taken and records maintained;

(v) Compatibility Test: Compatible transfusion for the purpose of variable number of Red Blood Cells, A, B, AB and O grouping shall be done if the platelets concentrate is contaminated with red blood cells.

(3) GRANULOCYTE CONCENTRATES:

(i) Storage: It shall be kept between 20 degree centigrade to 24 degree centigrade for a maximum period of 24 hours;
(ii) Unit of granulocytes shall not be less than 1 x 1010 (i.e. 1 x 10 raised to the power of 10) when prepared on cell separator;

(iii) Group specific tests/HLA test wherever required shall be carried out.

(4) FRESH FROZEN PLASMA:

Plasma frozen within 6 hours after blood collection and stored at a temperature not warmer than minus 30 degree centigrade, shall be preserved for a period of not more than one year.

(5) CRYOPRECIPITATE:

Concentrate of anti-hemophiliac factor shall be prepared by thawing of the fresh plasma frozen stored at minus 30 degree centigrade.
(a) Storage:

Cryoprecipitate shall be preserved at a temperature not higher than minus 30 degree centigrade and may be preserved for a period of not more than one year from the date of collection.

(b) Activity:

Anti-hemophiliac factor activity in the final product shall be not less than 80 units per bag. One percent of the total cryoprecipitate prepared shall be tested of which seventy five percent of the unit shall conform to the said specification.

F PLASMAPHERESIS, PLATELETPHERESIS, LEUCAPHERESIS, USING A CELL SEPARATOR.
An area of 10 square meters shall be provided for apheresis in the blood bank.

The blood banks specifically permitted to undertake the said apheresis on the donor shall observe the criteria as specified in item H relating to Criteria for blood donation ―I.
Blood Banks/Blood Components‖ of this Part. The written consent of the donor shall be taken and the donor must be explained, the hazards of apheresis. The Medical Officer shall certify that the donor is fit for apheresis and it shall be carried out by a trained person under supervision of the Medical Officer.

(A) PLASMAPHERESIS, PLATELETPHERESIS AND LEUCAPHERESIS:
The donors subjected to plasmapheresis, plateletpheresis and leucapheresis shall, in addition to the criteria specified in item H relating to the CRITERIA FOR BLOOD DONATION, under the heading ―I. BLOOD BANKS/BLOOD COMPONENTS‖ of this Part being observed, be also subjected to protein estimation on post-pheresis/first sitting whose results shall be taken as reference for subsequent/sitting. It shall also be necessary that the total plasma obtained from such donor and periodicity of Plasmapheresis shall be according to the standards described under validt. Standard Operating Procedures.

NOTE :

(i) At least 48 hours must elapse between successive apheresis and not more than twice in a week.

(ii) Extracoporeal blood volume shall not exceed 15% of donor‘s estimated blood volume.

(iii) Platelet pheresis shall not be carried out on donors who have taken medication containing Asprin within 3 days prior to donation.

(iv) If during plateletpheresis or leucapheresis, RBCs cannot be re-transfused then at least 12 weeks shall elapse before a second cytapheresis procedure is conducted.

(B) MONITORING FOR APHERESIS:

Before starting apheresis procedure, hemoglobin or haematocrit shall be done. Platelet count, WBC counts, differential count may be carried out. In repeated plasmapheresis, the serum protein shall be 6 gm./ml.

(C) COLLECTION OF PLASMA:

The quantity of plasma separated from the blood of donor shall not exceed 500 ml. per sitting and once in a fortnight or shall not exceed 1000 ml per month.

PART XII C

I. REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURE OF BLOOD PRODUCTS

The blood products shall be manufactured in a separate premises other than that meant for blood bank. The requirements that are essential for grant or renewal of licence to manufacture blood products such as Albumin, Plasma Protein Fraction, Immunoglobins and Coagulation Factor Concentrates, shall be as follows, namely: -

A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:

1. Location and surroundings, buildings and water supply:

The requirements as regards location and surrounding, buildings and water supply as contained in paragraphs 1.1.1, 1.1.2, 1.1.3 of Part 1 of Schedule M shall apply mutatis mutandis to the manufacture of blood products.

2. Disposal of waste and infectious materials:

(i) The requirements as regards disposal of waste and infectious materials as contained in paragraph 1.1.4 of Part 1 of Schedule M shall apply mutatis mutandis to the manufacture of blood products.

(ii) Proper facility shall also be provided for potentially infectious materials, particularly HIV I & HIV II 1[(Hepatitis B surface antigen and Hepatitis C Virus antibody)] through autoclaving, incineration or any other suitable validt. methods.

3. Health, clothing and sanitation personnel:

(i) The requirement as contained in paragraph 3 of Part I of Schedule M shall be complied with.

(ii) The personnel working in the manufacturing areas shall be vaccinated against Hepatitis B virus and other infectious transmitting diseases.

4. Requirements for manufacturing area for Blood Products:

(i) For the manufacture of blood products, separate enclosed areas specifically designated for the purpose shall be provided. These areas be provided with air locks for entry and shall be essentially dust free and ventilated with an air supply. Air supply for manufacturing area shall be filtered through bacteria retaining filters (HEPA Filters) and shall be at a pressure higher than in the adjacent areas.

The filters shall be checked for performance on installation and periodically thereafter, and records thereof shall be maintained.

(ii) Interior surfaces (walls, floors and ceilings) shall be smooth and free from cracks, they shall not shed matter and shall permit easy cleaning and disinfection. Drains shall be excluded from aseptic areas.

Routine microbial counts of the manufacturing area shall be carried out during manufacturing operations. The results of such counts shall be checked against well documented in-house standards and records maintained.
Access to the manufacturing areas shall be restricted to a minimum number of authorized personnel. Special procedures for entering and leaving the manufacturing areas shall be prominently displayed.

(iii) Sinks shall be excluded from aseptic areas. Any sink installed in other clean areas shall be of suitable material such as stainless steel, without an overflow, and be supplied with water of potable quality. Adequate precautions shall be taken to avoid contamination of the drainage system with dangerous effluents and airborne dissemination of pathogenic micro-organisms.

(iv) Lighting, air-conditioning, ventilation shall be designed to maintain a satisfactory temperature and relative humidity to minimize contamination and to take account of the comfort of personnel working with protective clothing.

(v) Premises used for the manufacture of blood products shall be suitably designed and constructed to facilitate good sanitation.

(vi) Premises shall be carefully maintained and it shall be ensured that repair and maintenance operations do not present any hazard to the quality of products. Premises shall be cleaned and, where applicable, disinfected according to detailed written validt.
procedures.

(vii) Adequate facilities and equipments shall be used for the manufacture of blood products derived from blood plasma.

(viii) All containers of blood products, regardless of the stage of manufacture, shall be identified by securely attached labels. Cross contamination shall be prevented by adoption of the following measures, namely: –

(a) processing and filling shall be in segregated areas;

(b) manufacture of different products at the same time shall be avoided;

(c) simultaneous filling of the different products shall be avoided;

(d) ensure transfer, containers/materials by means of airlocks, air extraction, clothing change and careful washing and decontamination of equipment;

(e) protecting containers/materials against the risk of contamination caused by re-circulation of untreated air or by accidental re-entry of extracted air;

(f) using containers that are sterilized or are of documented low ―bioburden‖,

(ix) Positive pressure area shall be dedicated to the processing area concerned; (x) Airhandling units shall be dedicated to the processing area concerned;
(xi) Pipe work, valves and vent filters shall be properly designed to facilitate cleaning and sterilization. Valves on fractionation/reacting vessels shall be completely steam sterilisable. Air vent filters shall be hydrophobic and shall be validated for their designated use.

5. Ancillary Areas :

(i) Rest and refreshment rooms shall be separated from other areas.

(ii) Facilities for changing and storing clothes and for washing and toilet purposes shall be easily accessible and appropriate for the number of users.
Toilets shall not be connected directly with production or storage areas.

(iii) Maintenance workshops shall be separated from production areas.
Wherever parts and tools are stored in the production area, they shall be kept in rooms or lockers reserved for that use.

(iv) Animal houses shall be well isolated from other areas with separate entrance.

B. COLLECTION AND STORAGE OF PLASMA FOR FRACTIONATION

(a) Collection:

(1) Plasma shall be collected from the licensed Blood Banks through a cold chain process and stored in frozen condition not warmer than minus twenty degree centigrade.

(2) Individual plasma shall remain in quarantine till it is tested for 1[( Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C Virus antibody)], HIV I and HIV II.

(3) A sample from pooled – lot plasma of about 10-12 units of different donors shall be tested for 1[(Hepatitis B and Heptitis C Virus antibody)] HIV I and HIV II and if the same sample found negative, only then it shall be taken up for fractionation.

(b) Storage Area :

(1) Storage areas shall be of sufficient space and capacity to allow orderly storage of the various categories of materials, intermediates, bulk and finished products, products in quarantine, released, rejected, returned, or recalled products.

(2) Storage areas shall be designed or adopted to ensure good storage conditioning. In particular, they shall be clean, dry and maintained within temperature required for such storage and where special storage conditions are required (e.g. temperature, humidity), these shall be provided, checked and monitored.

(3) Receiving and dispatch bays shall protect materials and products from the weather and shall be designed and equipped to allow containers of incoming materials to be cleaned, if necessary, before storage.

(4) Where quarantine status is ensured by storage in separate areas, these areas shall be clearly marked and their access restricted only to authorized personnel.

(5) There shall be separate sampling area for raw materials. If sampling is performed in the storage area, it shall be conducted in such a way so as to prevent contamination or cross-contamination.

(6) Segregation shall be provided for the storage of rejected, recalled, or returned materials or products.

(7) Adequate facility shall be provided for supply of ancillary material, such as ethanol, water, salts and polyethylene glycol. Separate facilities shall be provided for the recovery of organic solvents used in fractionation.

1. Subs. by G.S.R 40(E), dt. 29.1.2001 (w.e.f. 1.6.2001)

C. PERSONNEL :

(1) Manufacture :

The manufacture of blood products shall be conducted under the active direction and personal supervision of competent technical staff, consisting of at

least one person who shall be a whole time employee, with one year practical experience in the manufacture of blood products / plasma fractionation and possesses –-

(a) Post-graduate degree in Medicine–M.D.
(Microbiology/Pathology/ Bacteriology/Immunology/Biochemistry);
or

(b) Post-graduate degree in Science (Microbiology); or (c) Post-graduate degree ib Pharmacy (Microbiology), from a recognized University or Institution.

2. Testing :

The head of the testing unit shall be independent of the manufacturing unit and testing shall be conducted under the active direction and personal supervision of competent technical staff consisting at least one person who shall be a whole time employee. The Head of the testing unit shall have eighteen months practical experience in the testing of drugs, especially the blood products and possesses –

(a) Post-graduate degree in Pharmacy or Science– (Chemistry/ Microbiology/ Bio-chemistry); or

(b) Post-graduate degree in Medicine– M.D(Microbiology/Pathology/ Biochemistry), from a recognized University or Institution.

D. PRODUCTION CONTROL :

(1) The production area and the viral inactivation room shall be centrally air- conditioned and fitted with HEPA filters having Grade C (Class 10,000) environment as given in the Table below.

(2) The filling and sealing shall be carried out under aseptic conditions in centrally air-conditioned areas fitted with HEPA Filters Grade A or, as the case may be, Grade B (Class 100) environment given in the said Table.

TABLE AIR CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM FOR MANUFACTURE OF STERILE PRODUCTS.
Grade Maximum number of particles permitted per m3
0.5 – 5 micron Less than 5 micron Maximum number of Viable Micro-organism permitted per m3

A (Class 100) (Laminar - Airflow workstation)

None Less than 1 B (Class 100)

None Less than 5 C (Class 10,000) 3,50,000

Less than 100

(3) The physical and chemical operations used for the manufacture of plasma fractionation shall maintain high yield of safe and effective protein.

(4) The fractionation procedure used shall give a good yield of products meeting the in-house quality requirements as approved by the Licensing Authority and Central Licence Approving Authority reducing the risk of microbiological contamination and protein denaturation to the minimum.

(5) The procedure adopted shall not affect the antibody activity and biological half- life or biological characteristics of the products.

E. VIRAL INACTIVATION PROCESS :

The procedure used by the licensee to inactivate the pathogenic organisms such as enveloped and non-enveloped virus, especially infectivity from HIV I & HIV II, 1[(Hepatitis B surface antigens and Hepatitis C Virus antibody)], the viral inactivation and validation methods adopted by the licensee, shall be submitted for approval to the Licensing Authority and Central Licence Approving Authority.

NOTES:

(1) No preservative (except stabilizer to prevent – protein denaturation such as glycine, sodium chloride or sodium caprylate) shall be added to Albumin, Plasma Protein Fraction, Intravenous Immunoglobulins or Coagulation Factor Concentrates without the prior approval of Licensing Authority and Central Licence Approving Authority.

(2) The licensee shall ensure that the said stabilizers do not have deleterial effect on the final product in the quantity present so as not to cause any untoward or adverse reaction in human beings.

F. QUALITY CONTROL:

Separate facilities shall be provided for Quality Control such as Hematological, Bio-chemical, Physico-chemical, Microbiological, Pyrogens, Instrumental and Safety testing. The Quality Control Department shall have inter alia the following principal duties, namely :-

(1) To prepare detailed instructions for carrying out test and analysis.

(2) To approve or reject raw material, components, containers, closures, inprocess materials, packaging material, labelling and finished products.
(3) To release or reject batch of finished products which are ready for distribution.
(4) To evaluate the adequacy of the conditions under which raw materials, semifinished products and finished products are stored.
1. Subs. by G.S.R 40(E), dt. 29.1.2001 (w.e.f. 1.6.2001)

(5) To evaluate the quality and stability of finished products and when necessary of raw materials and semi-finished products.
(6) To review production records to ensure that no errors have occurred or if errors have occurred that they have been fully investigated.
(7) To approve or reject all procedures, or specifications impacting on the identity, strength, quality and purity of the product.
(8) To establish shelf-life and storage requirements on the basis of stability tests related to storage conditions.
(9) To establish and when necessary revise, control procedures and specifications.
(10) To review complaints, recalls, returned or salvaged products and investigations conducted there under for each product.
(11) To review Master Formula Records/Cards periodically.

G. TESTING OF BLOOD PRODUCTS:

The products manufactured shall conform to the standards specified in the Indian Pharmacopoeia and where standards of any product is not specified in the Pharmacopoeia, the standard for such product shall conform to the standard specified in the United States Pharmacopoeia or the British Pharmacopoeia. The final products shall be tested for freedom from HIV I and HIV II antibodies 1[(Hepatitis B surface antigen and Hepatitis C Virus antibody)].

H. STORAGE OF FINISHED PRODUCT :

(i) The final products shall be stored between two degree centigrade to eight degree centigrade, unless otherwise specified by the Central Licence Approving Authority.

(ii) The shelf-life assigned to the products by the licensee shall be submitted for approval to the Licensing Authority and Central Licence Approving Authority.

I. LABELLING :

The products manufactured shall be labelled as specified in the Indian Pharmacopoeia, the British Pharmacopoeia or the United Stated Pharmacopoeia which shall be in addition to any other requirement stated under Part IX or Part X of these rules. The labels shall indicate the results of test for 1[(Hepatitis B surface antigen and Hepatitis C Virus antibody)] freedom from HIV I and HIV II antibodies.

J. RECORDS:
The licensee shall maintain records as per Schedule U and also comply with Batch manufacturing records as specified in Paragraph 9 of Part -I of Schedule M and any other requirement as may be directed by Licensing Authority and Central Licence Approving Authority.

K. MASTER FORMULA RECORDS:

The licensee shall maintain Master Formula Records relating to all manufacturing and quality control procedures for each product, which shall be prepared and endorsed by the Competent Technical Staff, i.e. Head of the manufacturing unit. The Master Formula Records shall contain: –

(i) the patent or proprietary name of the product along with the generic name, if any, strength and the dosage form;

(ii) a description or identification of the final containers, packaging materials, labels and closures to be used;

1. Subs. by G.S.R 40(E), dt. 29.1.2001(w.e.f. 1.6.2001)

(iii) the identity, quantity and quality of each raw material to be used irrespective of whether or not it appears in the finished product. The permissible overage that may be included in a formulated batch shall be indicated;

(iv) a description of all vessels and equipments and the sizes used in the process;
(v) manufacturing and control instructions along with parameters for critical steps such as mixing, drying, blending, sieving and sterilizing the product;
(vi) the theoretical yield to be expected from the formulation at different stages of manufacture and permissible yield limits;
(vii) detailed instructions on precautions to be taken in the manufacture and storage of drugs and of semi finished products; and (viii) the requirements in-process quality control tests and analysis to be carried out during each stage of manufacture including the designation of persons or departments responsible for the execution of such tests and analysis.

II. REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURE OF BLOOD PRODUCTS FROM BULK
FINISHED PRODUCTS

Where the blood products, such as Albumin, Plasma Protein Fraction, Immunoglobulins and Coagulation Factor Concentrates are manufactured through the manufacturing activities of filling and sealing the blood products from bulk powder or solution or both, the requirements as they apply to the manufacture of blood products from whole blood shall apply mutatis mutandis to such manufacture of blood products, unless other requirements have been approved by the Central Licence Approving Authority.]

1[PART XIID

REQUIREMENTS FOR COLLECTION, PROCESSING, TESTING, STORAGE,
BANKING AND RELEASE OF UMBILICAL CORD BLOOD DERIVED STEM CELLS

(A) GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Location, Surroundings and Building: The building (s) for storage of Umbilical cord blood shall be so situated and shall have such measures as to avoid risk of contamination from external environment including open sewage, drain, public lavatory or any factory which produces disagreeable or obnoxious odour or fumes, excessive soot, smoke, chemical or biological emissions.
2. Buildings and premises: (1) The premises used for processing and storage shall be designed, constructed and adapted and maintained to ensure that the above operations and other ancillary functions are performed smoothly under hygienic conditions and in sterile areas wherever required. They shall also conform to the conditions laid down in the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of
1948).

The premises shall be:
(a) Adequately provided with working space to allow orderly and logical placement of equipment, material and movement of personnel so as to maintain safe operations and prevent contamination;
(b) Designed / constructed / maintained to prevent entry of insects, pests, birds, vermins and rodent. interior surfaces (walls, floors, ceilings and doors) shall be smooth and free from cracks, and permit easy cleaning, painting and disinfection, and in aseptic areas the surfaces shall be impervious, non-shedding, non-flaking and non-cracking;
(c) Flooring shall be unbroken and provided with a cove both at the junction between the wall and the floor as well as the wall and the ceiling.

1. Inserted by G.S.R. 899(E) dated 27-12-2011

(d) Provided with light fitting and grills which shall flush with the walls and not hanging from the ceiling to prevent contamination;
(e) If provided with fire escapes, these shall be suitably installed in the walls without any gaps;
(f) Provided with the furniture in aseptic areas which is smooth, washable and made of stainless steel or any other appropriate non shedding material other than wood;
(g) Provided with separate areas for processing and storage of products to prevent mix- ups, product contaminations and cross contamination;
(h) Provided with defined environmental conditions for temperature, humidity, ventilation and air filtration. Classifications shall be defined and, if appropriate, monitored.

(2) A periodical record of cleaning and renovating of the premises shall be maintained.

3. Disposal of waste and infectious materials:
(a) Waste materials awaiting disposal shall be stored safely;
(b) The disposal of sewage and effluents from the facility shall be in conformity with the requirements of the Pollution Control Board;
(c) All bio-medical waste shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of the Biomedical Waste Management and Handling Rules, 1996.

4. Health, clothing and Sanitation of personnel:
(a) All personnel shall undergo medical examination prior to employment and shall be free from infectious and contagious diseases and thereafter they should be medically examined periodically at least once a year and for this purpose records shall be maintained thereof:
(b) All personnel, prior to and during employment, shall be trained in practices which ensure personal hygiene and a high level of personal hygiene shall be observed by all those engaged in the collection, processing, banking of umbilical cord blood;
(c) All persons shall wear clean body coverings appropriate for their duties before entering the Processing Zone and the Change Rooms with adequate facilities shall be provided prior to entry into any specific zone;
(d) Smoking, eating, drinking is prohibited inside the Laboratory;
(e) All personnel working in the Laboratory shall be protected against virus infections.

5. Requirements for Processing, Testing and Storage Areas for Umbilical cord blood stem cells:
(a) Separate dedicated areas specifically designed for the purpose and the workload shall be provided:
(b) There shall be separate areas for designated work purposes namely:- (i) Cord blood Reception: cord blood reception area with space for transient storage of units and physical examination shall have adequate facilities for registration, date entry and generation of bar-coded labels. Air condition area of at lease 10.00 Sq.
meters shall be provided;
(ii) Cord blood processing area: The room shall be clean and have an air handling System to provide a Class 10,000 environment. Entry to this area shall be through air lock. The room will house Class 100 biological safety cabinets for Umbilical cord blood processing. The temperature of the clean room shall be maintained 20 oC to 25oC and with a positive differential pressure of 10-15 pascals and Relative humidity of 50-60% Minimum area shall be 10.00 Sq. meters for the activity;
(iii) Haematology and Serology Laboratory: The laboratory shall be equipped and utilized for the purpose of independently testing of Umbilical Cord Blood for ABO grouping and Rh Typing, Total Nucleated Cell Count, Progenitor cell count and

viability test. The room shall be air-conditioned and area of at least 10.00 Sq. meters shall be provided.
(iv) Transfusion Transmissible Disease Screening Laboratory: The Laboratory shall be equipped and utilized for screening tests on maternal blood for infectious diseases viz. HIV I & II; Hepatitis B & C virus, syphilis, malaria, CMV and HTLV. The room shall be air-conditioned and area of at least 10.00 Sq. meters shall be provided.
(v) Sterility Testing Laboratory: The laboratory shall be used for performing Sterility tests on Umbilical Cord blood unit. The premises may be classified depending on the testing method used. The room shall be air-conditioned with adequate and ancillary area for media prepar ation, sterilization, incubation and decontamination. Area of at least 10.00 Sq. meters shall be provided.
(vi) HLA Typing Laboratory: The Umbilical Cord blood unit shall have arrangements for HLA typing and genetic disease testing. In-house testing can be done by providing a well demarcated laboratory from the processing area for evaluation of possible genetic disease and HLA typing. The area shall have Class 100,000 environment and air-conditioned and area of at least 10.00 Sq. meters shall be provided.
(vii) Sterilization-cum-washing: Appropriate facility shall be provided within the premises for proper washing and sterilization. This facility would be optional for laboratories using entirely disposable items.
(viii) Records and Store Rooms: There shall be designed record room(s) and store room(s) of at least 10.00 Sq. meters each. The access to record room shall be permitted only to authorized person. The room will have adequate protective facilities as the documents and records are to be preserved for long years.
(ix) Cryogenic Storage room: A minimum space of 20.00 sq. meters shall be provided by the licensee. The cryogenic storage room shall have provision for temperature monitoring of storage vessels, liquid nitrogen level in storage vessels and oxygen meter. The service space between each liquid nitrogen storage vessel, supply cylinders and connecting hose should be minimum 1.00 sq. Meters. Separate storage space for other accessories required shall be provided. The room shall be airconditioned.
(x) General Storage area: General storage area shall be provided to store all the consumables, under conditions deemed optimum for storage by manufacturers.

B. COLLECTION AND STORAGE OF PROCESSED UMBILICAL CORD BLOOD
COMPONENT
1. Collection:
(a) Umbilical Cord blood unit specific for an individual will be collected after signing an agreement with the parents, whose child‘s Umbilical Cord blood is to be collected and the cord blood bank. Private and Public Umbilical Cord blood banking to have different agreements;
(b) Umbilical Cord blood shall be collected from hospitals, nursing homes, birthing centers and from any other place where a consenting mother delivers, under the supervision of the qualified Registered Medical Practitioner responsible for the delivery;
(c) The cord blood shall be collected aseptically in a disposable PVC bag, containing adequate quantity of sterile, pyrogen free anti-coagulant and sealed effectively and such PVC Bags shall be procured from licensed manufacturer;
(d) The Umbilical Cord blood would be collected from a premises operating in hygienic condition to allow proper operation, maintenance and cleaning.
2. Transportation:

(a) Umbilical Cord blood shall be transported from the birthing center to the designated laboratory under and as per procedure prescribed by the cord blood bank;
(b) The transportation procedure shall be validated to ensure optimum survival of the Stem Cells;
(c) The transportation temperature should be between 18 to 28oC;
(d) The time period between collection and processing shall not exceed 72 hours.
3. Storage:
(a) The Umbilical Cord blood shall be stored at room temperature between 20 to 25oC in the reception area prior to processing;
(b) Samples pending tests for specific transfusion transmittable infectious diseases shall be stored in a segregated manner.
Note:- Temperature range between 4 to 37 degrees Celsius, for the whole time period of transit may be allowed beyond the 18oC to 28oC in exceptional cases. The effects of deviation of transit temperature from the optimum, on the product shall be adequately explained by the licensee in the client education booklet.

C. PERSONNEL

Cord blood bank shall have following categories of whole time competent technical staff, namely:-
1. Medical Director:- The operation of cord blood bank shall be conducted under the active directions and supervision of a Medical Director who is a whole time employee and is possessing a Post Graduate degree in medicine – MD [Pathology/Transfusion Medicine/Microbiology] and has experience / training in cord blood processing and Cryogenic Storage.
2. Laboratory In-charge: The laboratory in-charge shall have Post Graduate qualification in Physiology or Botany or Zoology or Cell Biology or Microbiology or Biochemistry or Life Sciences or Graduate in Pharmacy and one year working experience in pathological laboratory licensed by the local health authority or any microbiology laboratory of a licensed drug manufacturing / testing unit and or experience / training in cord blood processing and cryogenic storage.
3. Technical Supervisor (cord blood processing):- The technical supervisor shall have a:
(a) Degree in Physiology or Botany or Zoology, Pharmacy or Cell Biology or Bio Sciences or Microbiology or Biochemistry or Medical Laboratory Technology (M.L.T.) with minimum of three years of experience in the preparation of blood components and / or experience or training in cord blood processing and Cryogenic Storage; or (b) Diploma in Medical Laboratory Technology (M.L.T.) with five years experience in the preparation of blood components and experience or training in cord blood processing and Cryogenic Storage shall be essential.
4. Cord Blood Bank Technician(s):- The technicians employed shall have a:
(a) A degree in Physiology or Botany or Zoology or Pharmacy or Cell Biology or Bio Science or Microbiology or Biochemistry or Medical Laboratory Technology (M.L.T.) with six months experience and or training in cord blood processing and cryogenic storage; or (b) Diploma in Medical Laboratory Technology (MLT) with one year experience in the testing of bloodand / or its components and / or experience or training in cord blood processing and Cryogenic Storage.

D. AIR HANDLING SYSTEM
1. Air handling for sterile areas shall be different from those for other areas. The filter configuration in the air handling system shall be suitably designed to achieve the grade of

air as given in the Table I. The environmental microbiological monitoring of clean areas shall be in accordance to the recommended limits given in Table II.
2. The Processing area shall have HVAC system and fitted with HEPA Filters having Grade C (Class 10,000) environment as given in Table I.
3. The entire processing shall be done conforming to Grade A (Class 100) Standard of air quality.

TABLE I
AIR BORNE PARTICULATE CLASSIFICATIONS FOR MANUFACTURE OF STERILE
PRODUCTS

Grade Maximum number of permitted particles per cubic meter equal to or above At rest (b) In Operation (a) A B(a) C(a) D(a)
0.5μm 3,500 3,500 3,50,000 35,00,000 5 μm

20,000
0.5 μm 3,500 3,50,000 35,00,000 Not defined 5μm

20,000 Not defined

Notes:- (a) In order to reach the B, C and D air grades, the number of air changes shall be related to the size of the room and the equipment and personnel present in the room. The air system shall be provided with the appropriate filters such as HEPA for grades A, B and C. The maximum permitted number of particles in the ―at rest‖ condition shall approximately be as under:- [Grade A and B corresponds with class 100 or M 3.5 or class 5]; Grade C with Class 10,000 or M 5.5 or ISO Class 7; Grade D with Class 1,00,000 or M 6.5 or ISO Class 8.
(b) The requirement and limit for the area shall depend on the nature of the operation carried out.

TABLE II

RECOMMENDED LIMITS FOR MICROBIOLOGICAL MONITORING OF CLEAN AREAS ―IN OPERATION‖

Notes:- (a) These are average values.
(b) Individual settle plates may be exposed for not less than two hours in Grade B, C and D areas and for not less than thirty minutes in Grade A area.

E. QUALITY CONTROL
1. Facilities shall be provided for Quality Control such as Haematological, Microbiological and Instrumental testing.
Grade Air samples Cfu/m3 Settle Plates (dia 90mm) cfu/2hrs Contact plates (dia 55 mm) cfu per plate Glove points (Five fingers) cfu per glove A Less than

Less than 1 Less than 1 Less than 1 B

C

- D

-

2. Following duties shall be performed under the function of quality control:
(a) To prepare detailed instructions for carrying out such tests and analysis;
(b) To approve or reject raw materials and consumables, used in any step, on the basis of approved specifications;
(c) Haematological tests like Total Nucleated Cell Counts, Mononuclear Cell Count, Enumeration of the population of Stem Cells, Stem Cell viability shall be performed on samples of processed Umbilical cord blood unit;
(d) Microbiological Tests shall be done on Maternal Blood samples for freedom from Hepatitis B Surface Antigen, Hepatitis C Virus antibody, HIV I and II antibodies.
Syphilis, Malaria, CMV and HTLV. Bacterial and Fungal Culture shall be done on the umbilical cord blood samples;
(e) Instruments which would be used to process test and store the UCB unit would be validated before commissioning and calibrated from time to time to check their conformity to specific standards according to an approved and valid protocol;
(f) The environmental monitoring of the clean rooms would be done at periodic intervals according to an accepted and validated protocol;
(g) All tests mentioned above shall be done in house except tests under itme numbers (e), (f) and test for enumeration of Stem Cell Population, HLA typing and Genetic Disease Testing which may be outsourced to a competent third party approved by the licensing authority.

F. SCREENING TESTS

1. The maternal blood sample shall be tested for (a) Hepatitis B;
(b) Hepatitis C;
(c) HIV 1 & 2;
(d) Syphilis;
(e) Malaria;
(f) CMV;
(g) HTLV
2. The Umbilical Cord Blood shall be tested for (a) Total Nucleated Cell count;
(b) Total Mononuclear Cell Count;
(c) Progenitor Cell (CD34+) enumeration;
(d) Cell Viability;
(e) ABO Group and Rh Type;
(f) Sterility as regards Bacterial and Fungal contamination status;
(g) HLA Matching (Only for allogenic Cord Blood Units).

G. STORAGE

1. The Umbilical cord blood shall be cryopreserved using a controlled rate freezing or equivalent validated procedures. The frozen storage shall be at minus 196oC and shall not be warmer than minus 150oC.
2. There will be no shelf life for this class of product.
H. REFERENCE SAMPLES
1. At least two reference samples shall be collected from cord blood unit product prior to cryopreservation and stored at minus 196oC and shall not be warmer than minus 150oC.
2. At least one additional reference sample shall be stored at minus 76oC or colder for the purposes other than viability analysis.

I. LABELLING
1. Initial label placed during collection shall specify:

(a) Human Umbilical Cord Blood;
(b) Approximate Volume or weight of contents in the collection bag [UCB+ Anticoagulant];
(c) Mother ‘s name;
(d) Place of collection;
(e) Date and time of collection;
(f) Collected by;
(g) To be labeled in bold, ―ROOM TEMPERATURE ONLY– DO NOT REFRIGERATE, DO NOT IRRADIATE‖;
(h) Manufacturing license number.
2. Label at completion of processing and before issue - Cryogenic Storage Label [Statutory label] shall indicate the following:- (a) Name of product:- Human Progenitor Cell [HPC] – Cord Blood;
(b) Volume or weight of contents;
(c) Percentage of Cryoprotectant [DMSO];
(d) Percentage of any other additive / preservant;
(e) Date of collection [birth] ...;
(f) Date of processing ...;
(g) Name of manufacturer...;
(h) Manufacturing license number;
(i) Storage temperature – not less than, - 196oC and shall not be warmer than minus 150oC, (j) Unique Traceability Number and / or BAR Code.
3. Issue label at the time of release of Cord Blood Unit shall indicate the following namely:- (a) Name of manufacturer;
(b) License number;
(c) All details of the Cryogenic Storage Label;
(d) The results of Total Nucleated Cells, Progenitor Cell percentage {CD34+), Viability;
(e) Results of Transfusion Transmittable diseases testing on maternal blood;
(f) ABO Group and Rh Type;
(g) Date of processing;
(h) Result of HLA typing (allogenic);
(i) Statement ―properly identify intended Recipient and Product‖;
(j) A statement indicating that leukoreduction filters should not be used;
(k) Statement ―Do not irradiate‖ (l) Name and address of receiving hospital.

J. RECORDS OR DOCUMENTATION
1. The licensee shall maintain the following records (a) Client / donor enrolment / agreement record;
(b) Collection of unit and transportation record;
(c) Master record of stored unit;
(d) HLA Matching record;
(e) Unit Release Register;
(f) Stock Register for Blood Collection Bag Cryoprotectant and Preservant, RBC Sedimentation Enhancer;
(g) Stock Register for Diagnostic Kits, Reagents and other consumables;
(h) Record on feedback after use of cord blood / Adverse reaction record.
2. The following Standard Operating Procedures shall be maintained by the licensee, namely:- (a) Umbilical Cord Blood collection;
(b) Transportation of the collected Umbilical cord Blood unit;
(c) Processing of Umbilical cord blood unit;
(d) Cryogenic storage of processed umbilical cord blood unit;

(e) Testing of maternal blood for transfusion transmittable infections;
(f) Testing of Umbilical cord blood for ABO Grouping and Rh Typing;
(g) Testing of Umbilical cord blood unit for Total Nucleated Cell Count, Mononuclear Cell Count, Progenitor Cell (CD34+) enumeration, and viability;
(h) Testing of Umbilical cord blood stem cell unit for sterility;
(i) Disposal of bio medical waste;
(j) Dispensation of Umbilical cord blood unit;
(k) Preventive maintenance Protocol for all Instruments;
(l) Acceptance / Rejection procedure of consumables;
(m) Environment monitoring of classified areas;
(n) Any other standard operative procedure as per requirements.

K. CORD BLOOD RELEASE
1. There shall be designated area with adequate space for procedures and records related to cord blood unit selection and release.
2. The cord blood bank shall obtain written or electronic request from the transplant physician or designee for shipment of the cord blood unit.
3. Accompanying documentation at the time of issue from the cord blood bank shall include indications, contra-indications, caution, instruction for handling and use of the cord blood unit including short-term storage and preparation for transplantation.
4. Procedure for transportation of cryopreserved cord blood unit within the facility shall be designed to protect the integrity of the unit and the health and safety of the personnel.
5. Cryopreserved cord blood unit stored at -150oC or colder shall be transported in a liquid nitrogen cooled dry shipper that contains adequate absorbed liquid nitrogen and has been validated to maintain temperature below -150oC for at least 48 hours beyond the expected time of arrival at the receiving facility.

1[PART XIII]
GENERAL

1. For the purposes of this Schedule, any test or method of testing described in the 2[Indian Pharmacopoeia] shall be deemed to be a method approved by the Licensing Authority.

2. The Licensing Authority shall publish in the Official Gazette from time to time particulars of any test or method of testing approved by him.

1. Renumbered by Notification No. F-18-1/46, dt. 18-6-48
2. Subs. by G.S.R. 19, dated 15-12-1977

1[SCHEDULE F(I) PART 1–VACCINES (A) PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO THE PRODUCION OF BACTERIAL VACCINES:

1. Definition. –(1) This part of the Schedule applies to bacterial vaccines made from any micro-organism pathogenic to man or other animal and to vaccines made from other micro-organisms which have any antigenic value.

(2) For the purposes of this part of the Schedule, a bacterial vaccine means a sterile suspension of a killed culture of the micro-organism from which the vaccine derives its name or a sterile extract or derivative of a micro-organism, or a pure suspension of living microorganisms which have been previously made avirulent.

2. Staff of Establishment.–A competent expert in bacteriology with sufficient experience in the manufacture and standardisation of biological products shall be in charge of the establishment responsible for the production of bacterial vaccine and he shall be assisted by a staff adequate for carrying out the tests required during the preparation and standardisation of the vaccines.

3. Proper Name.–The proper name of any vaccine shall be the name of the microorganism from which it is made followed by the word ―Vaccine‖ unless this Schedule otherwise provides or if there is no other special provision in this Schedule, some other name as approved by the Licensing Authority. Provided that in the case of the undermentioned preparations the proper name of the vaccine may be as follows: –

1. Anthrax Spore Vaccine (Living).

2. Blackquarter Vaccine.

3. Enterotoxaemia Vaccine.

4. Fowl Cholera Vaccine.

5. Haemorrhagic Septicaemia Adjuvant Vaccine.

6. Haemorrhagic Septicaemia Vaccine (Broth).
2[7. Multi Component Clostridial Vaccine.

8. Hemorrhagic Septicaemia Vaccine – Alum Treated.]

4. Records.–Cultures used in the preparation of vaccine before being manipulated into a vaccine, should be thoroughly tested for identity by the generally accepted tests applicable to the particular micro-organisms.

The permanent records which the licensee is required to keep shall include amongst others, a record of the origin, properties and characteristics of the cultures.

5. Combined Vaccines.–Vaccines may be issued either singly or combined in any proportion in the same container. In the case of combination of vaccines, a name for the combined vaccine may be submitted by the licensee to the Licensing Authority, and if approved, may be used as the proper name of the vaccine.

1. Added by Ministry of Health F.P., W.H and U.D. Notfn. No. F.1-6/62-D (SO. 2889), dt. 2-7-1969
2. Ins. by G.S.R. 659(E) ,dt. 31.8.1994.

6. Preparation– Bacterial vaccines, simple or polyvalent, are prepared from selected cultures after careful examination for their identity, specificity, purity and antigencity. They may be prepared in the following manner:.–

(a) Formal Cultures or Bacterins.– The selected pure culture strain or strain are grown in a suitable fluid medium, at an optimum temperature, for an appropriate period. The pure growth is then exposed to the action of solution of Formaldehyde I.P. in suitable concentration and temperature. The product is finally filled in suitable sterilised containers which are subsequently sealed.

(b) Vaccine of Bacterial Products or Bacterial Derivatives.–These vaccines are prepared by growing the organisms on suitable media and then deriving specific antigenic constituents of the bacteria by various special methods.

(c) Living Bacterial Vaccines.– They are prepared from non-pathogenic but fully immunogenic strains of micro-organism. Strict aseptic precautions are taken throughout the preparation against the introduction of microbial contaminants.

7. General Standards:.

(a )Description.– Bacterial vaccines are colourless to yellowish brown liquids containing dead or viable bacteria in homogenous suspension.

(b) Identification.–All types of vaccines confer active immunity in the susceptible animals which can be demonstrated by injecting suitable experimental animals with the calculated doses of the product and subsequently determining the presence of the protective antibodies in their serum and/or by challenging the vaccinated animals by injecting virulent strain of the homologous organisms. The protected animals should survive the challenge.

(c) Test for Sterility.–All bacterial vaccines shall be tested for sterility in accordance with the provision of Rules 115 to 119 (both inclusive). If the vaccine contains added bactericide or bacteriostatic, a quantity of medium sufficient to render the growth inhibitor ineffective is added to the sample, or a suitable substance is added to the sample, or a suitable substance is added in concentration sufficient to render the growth inhibitor ineffective but not itself to inhibit the growth of micro-organism.

(d) Purity Tests for Living Bacterial Vaccine.–Petri dishes containing suitable media are streaked with the final product and incubated at 37 ̊ C for 72 hours. The vaccine passes the test if no growth of micro-organisms other than those from which the vaccine was prepared is observed. Other tests include examination for motility of the organisms, fermentation reactions and thermoagglutination test and dye-inhibitor tests in case of bruceliza vaccine.

(e) Safety Test.– The safety of the vaccine shall be assessed by injecting it in appropriate doses in suitable susceptible animals. No animal should show any untoward, general or local reaction within seven days after inoculation.

(f). Potency Test.–Wherever applicable, susceptible experimental animals are inoculated with the calculated doses of the final product. The animals are challenged after the period of immunisation, with virulent infective dose of the homologous culture along with the controls. The potency of the vaccine is assessed by the survival of the vaccinated animals and the death of the controls.

8. Labelling:

(a) The label on the ampoule or the bottle shall indicate:.– (i) Proper name.
(ii) Contents in millilitres or doses.
(iii) Potency, if any.

(iv) Batch number.
(v) Expiry date.
(b) The label on the outside container shall indicate:
(i) Proper name.
(ii) Contents in Millilitres or doses.
(iii) Batch number.
(iv) Date of manufacture.

(v) Manufacturing licence No.

(vi) Manufacturer‘s name and address.
(vii) ―For animal treatment only‖.
(viii) Storage conditions.

9. Storage.–-Bacterial vaccines shall be stored, protected from light at temperature between 2 ̊C to 4 ̊C and shall not be frozen.

10. Date of manufacture.– The date of manufacture shall be, unless otherwise specified in the individual monograph in this part, as defined in clause (b) of sub-rule (3) of rule 109.

Anthrax Spore Vaccine (Living)

1. Synonyms.–-Avirulent Anthrax Spore Vaccine or Bacillus Anthracis Vaccine (Living).

2. Definition.–-The vaccine is a suspension of living spores of an uncapsulated avirulent strain of B anthracis in 50 per cent glycerine saline.

3. Preparation.–-Avirulent B, anthracis of known antigenicity is grown on suitable medium at pH 7.4 in Roux flasks. After 72 hours incubation at 37 ̊ C, the pure sporulated culture growth which shows 70 to 80 per cent sporulation is washed with normal saline and glycerinated to the extent of 50 per cent by weight of the culture washing and the whole suspension is kept at room temperature for twenty-one days to allow for the stabilization of the spores.

4. Standard:.

(a) Description.–- It is slightly opalescent or pale brown semi-viscous liquid.

(b) Identification.–-Uncapsulated B anthracis which is avirulent can be isolated from the vaccine.

(c) Sterility test.–- Should comply with the test for sterility described in the general monograph on ―Bacterial Vaccine‖.

(d) Purity Test.–- Complies with the ―Purity Tests for Living Bacterial Vaccine‖ described under the general monograph on ―Bacterial Vaccines‖.

(e) Safety Test.–-Four healthy adult guinea-pigs each weighing 300-450 g. not previously treated with any material which will interfere with the test are inoculated subcutaneously, two with 0.2 ml. each and two with 0.5 ml. each of the unglycerinated suspension respectively. Four more guinea-pigs are injected with 1:5 dilution of the glycerinated product in the same manner. No untoward reaction should be observed and none of the animals should die of anthrax during the period of observation for seven days.

(f) Safety and Potency Test in sheep and goat–Spore count of the glycerinated suspension is made after twenty-one days from the date of glycerination. Three plates for each of the three dilution 105, 106 and 107 are made.

Eight sheep and eight goats each weighing not less than 18 kg. are injected subcutaneously in the following manner:–

two sheep : Each subcutaneously with 10 ml. of the stock suspension (for safety).
two goats : Each subcutaneously with 5 ml. of the stock suspension (for safety).
six sheep : Each subcutaneously with one million spores suspended in 50 per cent glycerine saline solution.

six goats : Each subcutaneously with one million spores suspended in 50 per cent glycerine saline solution.

None of these animals should die of anthrax. Twenty one days after vaccination, the animals are challenged with 100 lethal doses of virulent B. anthracis spores along with two healthy sheep and two goats as controls.

All the controls should die of anthrax within 72 hours after challenge and at least 66 per cent of the vaccinated animals should survive. The animals shall be observed for a minimum of ten days from the date of challenge.
1[(g) Viable Count.– The vaccine when plated on suitable media should show 10 million viable spores per cattle dose and 5 million spores per sheep dose.]

5. Labelling and Storage.– Should comply with the requirements for ―Labelling‖ and ―Storage‖ as laid down in the general monograph on ―Bacterial Vaccines‖.

2[6. Expiry Date.– The date of expiry of the potency of the vaccine shall be not more than two years from the date of manufacture if stored in 4o C and six months, if stored at room temperature.]

Blackquarter Vaccine

1. Synonym.–Blackleg vaccine or Quarter Evil Vaccine.

2. Definition.– Blackquarter Vaccine is a culture of Clostridium chauvoei grown in a suitable anaerobic fluid medium and rendered sterile and toxic by the addition of Solution of Formaldehyde I.P. in such a manner that it retains its immunising properties.

3. Preparation.–Cultures of Cl. Chauvoei are grown in a suitable anaerobic fluid medium and killed by the addition of a suitable concentration of Solution of Formaldehyde I.P. The final product shall be adjusted to pH.7.0.

4. Standards:.

(a) Description.–It is a yellowish brown liquid containing dead bacteria in suspension.

(b) Identification.–It protects susceptible animals against infection with Cl.
Chauvoei.

(c) Sterility Test.–Should comply with the test for sterility described in the general monograph on ―Bacterial Vaccine‖.

1. Subs. by. G.S.R 659 (E) ,dt.. 31-8-1994.
2. Ins. by. G.S.R 659 (E) ,dt.. 31-8-1994.

(d) Safety and Potency Tests.–At least six adult healthy guinea-pigs each weighing 300 g to 450 g are injected subcutaneously each with 3 ml. of the product followed a week later by a second injection with the same dose. They should not show any systemic reaction but may show only a minimum of local reaction.
Fourteen days after the second injection six of the vaccinated guinea-pigs are challenged intramuscularly with 25 viable spores of Cl. Chauvoei equivalent to 5 c.h.d. along with 0.2 ml. of a 5 per cent solution of calcium chloride. Two controls are used. The controls should die of the specific injection and at least 4 of the six vaccinated animals should survive before the product is passed for issue.

5. Labelling and Storage.– Should comply with the requirements of ―Labelling‖ and ―Storage‖ as laid down in the general monograph on ―Bacterial Vaccines‖.

6. Expiry Date.–- The date of expiry of the potency of the vaccine shall not be more than twenty-four months from the date of manufacture.

Brucella Abortus ( Strain 19 Vaccine) (Living)

1. Synonym.–Contagious Abortion Vaccine, (Strain 19) (Living).

2. Definition.–Brucella Abortus (Strain 19) Vaccine (Living) is a suspension of a pure smooth living culture of Br. Abortus of low virulence in normal saline solution.

3. Preparation.–Forty eight to seventy-two hour old growth of Br. Abortus (Strain 19) on potato agar medium in Roux flasks washed with buffered normal saline solution pH 6.4 and the pure growth from the flasks are pooled together, 0.5 ml. of the pooled product is mixed with 4.5 ml. of normal saline solution at pH 6.4 in graduated centrifuge tube and centrifuge at 3000 r.p.m for one hour. The percentage of cell deposit is assessed by reading the amount of cell deposit obtained.

The concentrated suspension is then diluted with buffer normal saline solution so that the final product contains 0.72 per cent bacterial cell deposit.

4. Standard:

(a) Description.–It is an almost white turbid liquid containing live bacteria in suspension.

(b) Identification.–It consists of Gram-negative bacilli capable of protecting susceptible animals against Brucellosis.

(c) Sterility Test.–Should comply with the test for sterility described in the general monograph on ―Bacterial Vaccine‖.

(d) Purity Test.–A smear of the finished products is examined microscopically after staining by Gram‘s method for evidence of any contamination. When grown on suitable media, Br. Abortus should be obtained in a pure state.

(e) Safety Test.–Two healthy guinea-pigs each weighing 300 g. to 450g. are inoculated subcutaneously each with 1.0 ml. of the final product. The guinea-pigs should not show excessive reaction of a toxic nature during the period of observation of ten days.

(f) Potency Test.–Each of a group of four healthy guinea-pigs, drawn from a uniform stock and each weighing 300 g. to 450 g. is injected intra-muscularly with 1 ml.
of the vaccine, and is challenged nine weeks after vaccination by the intramuscular injection of 1 ml. of a suspension containing 5,000 fully virulent Br. Abortus organisms.
Each of a group of two unvaccinated guinea-pigs is similarly injected. After a further six weeks, the guinea-pigs are killed and cultures are made from their spleens. More than half of the vaccinated guinea-pigs contain no demonstrable Br. Abortus in the spleen; all the controls are infected.

(g) Viable Count.–The vaccine when plated on suitable media should show between 14, 000 million and 18,000 million Br. Abortus organisms per ml. At least 80 per cent brucella organisms should be in the smooth phase.

4. Labelling and storage.– Should comply with the requirements of ―Labelling‖ and ―Storage‖ as laid down in the general monograph on ―Bacterial Vaccines‖. The liquid vaccine shall be issued fresh as far as possible without allowing any period of storage after manufacture.

5. Expiry Date–The date of expiry of the vaccine shall be not more than five weeks from the date of manufacture.

Enterotoxaemia Vaccine

1. Synonyms.–Clostridium Welchii, Type D, Formal Culture: Pulpy Kidney Vaccine.

2. Definition.–Enterotoxaemia Vaccine is a culture of a highly toxigenic strain of Clostridium type D, group is an anaerobic medium rendered sterile and toxic by the addition of Solution of Formaldehyde I.P in such a manner that it retains its immunising properties.

3. Preparation.– Selected toxigenic strain of Cl. Welchii type D, is grown in a liquid medium under conditions which ensure maximum epsilon toxin production. The culture is checked for purity and toxicity as tested in mice. Solution of Formaldehyde I.P. is added in suitable concentration and the formolised culture is kept at 37 ̊ C till the production is sterile and non-toxic.

4. Standard:

(a) Description- It is a yellowish brown liquid containing dead bacteria in suspension.

(b) Identification- When injected into susceptible animals it stimulates the production of epsilon antitoxin of Cl. Welchii, type D.

(c) Sterility Test- Complies with the test for sterility described in the general monograph on ̳Bacterial Vaccines‘.

(d) Safety and Potency Tests- At least eight sheep each weighing not less than 18 kg. or twelve rabbits each weighing 1 kg. to 1.5 kg. are used for testing the safety and potency of each brew of the vaccine. Two sheep receive subcutaneously 10 ml. each and the other six sheep receive each 2.5 ml. of the product subcutaneously. The rabbits are given subcutaneously a dose of 5 ml. each. The sheep and rabbits are observed for five days. They should show only a minimum local reaction and no systemic reaction.

The sheep receiving 10 ml. are withdrawn from experiments after five days. Each of the other six sheep is inoculated with a second dose of 2.5 ml. fourteen days after the first injection. The rabbits are inoculated with 5 ml. as a second dose, after one month of the first inoculation. Ten days after the second inoculation the sera of sheep or rabbits are pooled separately. The pooled serum of each group of animal shall contain in each ml. not less than two international units of Cl. Welchii epsilon antitoxin which is determined by testing on mice as follows:

One ml. of the pooled serum is mixed with one ml. of the epsilon toxin of Cl.
Welchii type D, containing 300 mouse-minimum-lethal-doses (mouse m.l.d.) and kept at room temperature for half an hour. At least two mice each weighing not less than 18 g.
are each given intravenously 0.2 ml. of the mixture. As control two mice each weighing not less than 18 g. should each receive 0.2 ml. of the toxin containing 300 mouse m.l.d per ml. diluted with equal volume of normal saline. The control mice should die within 1 to 2 hours while the mice receiving the mixture of serum and toxin should survive for at

least two days. Sera containing one International Unit of epsilon antitoxin per ml. will be able to neutralise 150 mouse m.l.d. of epsilon toxin of Cl. Welchii, type D.

5. Labelling and Storage.–Should comply with the requirements regarding ―Labelling‖ and ―Storage‖ as laid down in the general monograph on ―Bacterial Vaccines‖.

6. Expiry Date.–The expiry date of potency of the vaccine shall be not more than twelve months from the date of manufacture.

Fowl Cholera Vaccine (Polyvalent)

1. Synonym.–Pasteurella Septica Vaccine (Avian).

2. Definition.–Fowl Cholera Vaccine is a formolised pure broth culture of virulent strains of Pasteurella Septica (Avian).

3. Preparation.–The strains are grown separately in nutrient broth for 48 hours at 37 ̊ C. The pure growth is killed by the addition of a Solution of Formaldehyde I.P in a suitable concentration. The cultures are then mixed in equal proportions and the final vaccine is bottled in suitable containers.

4. Standard-

(a) Description.–It is a light yellow liquid containing dead bacteria in suspension.

(b) Identification.–It protects susceptible birds against P. aviseptica infection.

(c) Sterility test.–Complies with the test for ―Sterility‖ described under the general monograph on ―Bacterial Vaccines‖..

(d) Safety Test.–Two healthy young fowls each weighing not less than 400 g. or twelve healthy mice are inoculated subcutaneously each with 1 ml. of the final product.
The birds should not show any untoward reaction during the period of observation for seven days.

5. Labelling and Storage.–Should comply with the requirements of ―Labelling‖ and ―Storage‖ as laid down in the general monograph on ―Bacterial Vaccines‖.

6. Expiry Date.–The date of expiry of potency of the Vaccine shall be not more than six months from the date of manufacture.

Hemorrhagic Septicaemia Adjuvant Vaccine

1. Synonym.– Pasteurella Septica Adjuvant Vaccine.

2. Definition.–The vaccine is a homogenous suspension of formolised agar-washed Pasteurella septica with liquid paraffin and lanolin.

3. Preparation.–Pure growth of a highly antigenic strain of P. Septica in phase 1 grown on nutrient agar medium containing 0.5 per cent yeast extract is washed with 0.5 per cent formol saline. The pooled suspension is diluted with normal saline to contain approximately 2100 million P. Septica organisms per ml. The safety test of this adjusted suspension is conducted on four white mice each weighing not less than 18 g. and observed for three days before it is mixed with liquid paraffin and lanolin in suitable proportion.

The mixture is blended until a homogenous emulsion is obtained which is filled in suitable containers.

4. Standard:

(a) Description− It is a white thick oily liquid containing dead bacteria in suspension.

(b) Identification.–It protects susceptible animals against infection with P. Septica.

(c) Sterility Test.–It complies with the test for ―Sterility‖ described in the general Monograph on ―Bacterial Vaccines‖.

(d) Safety Test.– Six white mice each weighing not less than 18 g. are inoculated intraperitoneally each with 0.5 ml. of the vaccine. None of the mice should die of pasteurellosis during the observation period for seven days.

(e) Potency Test.–Three susceptible calves in good condition between the ages of nine months to three years are injected intramuscularly, each with 2 ml. of the vaccine, in the case of animals weighing upto 140 kg. and 3 ml. for heavier ones.

Three weeks later these animals along with two healthy animals of the same type and species are challenged subcutaneously with 18 hours old broth culture of P. Septica equivalent to at least 50 million mouse minimum infective dose. Both the controls should die of pasteurellosis and at least two out of the three protected animals should survive the challenge dose for a period of seven days.

5. Labelling and storage- Should comply with the requirements for ―Labelling‖ and ―Storage‖ as laid down in the general monograph on ―Bacterial Vaccines‖.

6. Expiry Date- The date of expiry of potency of the vaccine shall be not more than twelve months from the date of manufacture.

Haemorrhagic Septicaemia Vaccine (Broth)

1. Synonym.–Pasteurella Septica Vaccine (Broth).

2. Definition.–Haemorrhagic Septicaemia Vaccine is formolised culture of a virulent strain of Pasteurella septica in nutrient broth.

3. Preparation.–.Septica culture is grown in nutrient broth at 37 ̊C. The pure growth is killed by the addition of a solution of Formaldehyde I.P. in a suitable concentration.

4. Standard:

(a) Description.–It is a pale yellow liquid containing dead bacteria in suspension.
(b) Identification.–It protects susceptible animals against infection with P.Septica.
(c) Sterility Test.–Complies with the test for ―Sterility‖ described under the general monograph on ―Bacterial Vaccines‖.

(d) Safety Test.–Four healthy rabbits each weighing 1 kg. to 1.5 kg. are inoculated subcutaneously each with 5 ml. of the product. There should be no untoward reaction during the period of observation for seven days. Alternately two rabbits and six mice may be employed. The dose for mice will be 0.5 ml.

5. Labelling and Storage.–Should comply with the requirements of ―Labelling‖ and ―Storage‖ as laid down in the general monograph on ―Bacterial Vaccines‖.

6. Expiry Date.–The date of expiry of potency of the vaccine shall be not more than six months from the date of manufacture.

Salmonella Abortus Equi Vaccine

1. Synonym.–Equine Abortion Vaccine.

2. Definition.– Equine Abortion Vaccine is a mixture of equal parts of pure formolised cultures of smooth laboratory strains of Salmonella abortus equi.

3. Preparation.–The strains are grown separately on plain agar in Roux flasks, for 2428 hours at 37 ̊ C. The pure growth is washed with normal saline solution and the washings are pooled together. The suspension is standardised to contain approximately 600 million Sal.Abortus equi organisms per ml. using normal saline solution as diluent. The culture is killed by the addition of sufficient quantity of solution of Formaldehyde I.P in a suitable

concentration and the product is kept at 37 ̊C for seven days. Potassium alum is added to give a final concentration of 1 per cent

4. Standard:

(a) Description.–It is an opalescent liquid containing dead bacteria in suspension.

(b) Identification.–It protects susceptible animals against infection with Sal.
Abortus equi.

(c) Sterility Test.–Complies with the test for sterility described in the general monograph on ―Bacterial Vaccines‖.

(d) Safety Test- Six white mice each weighing not less than 18 g. are inoculated intraperitoneally each with 0.5 ml. of the product. None of the mice should die of salmonellosis. The mice are observed for ninety-six hours.

5. Labelling and Storage- Should comply with the requirements for ―Labelling‖ and ―Storage‖ as laid down in the general monograph on ―Bacterial Vaccines‖.

6. Expiry Date- The date of expiry of potency of the vaccine shall be not more than six months from the date of manufacture.

Streptococcus Equi vaccine

1. Synonym.– Strangles Vaccine

2. Definition.– Streptococcus equi Vaccine is a phenolised culture of a number of different isolates of Streptococcus equi in glucose serum broth.

3. Preparation.– Equal proportions of forty-eight hours old pure cultures of different isolates of Str. Equi in serum glucose both are mixed together. The suspension is centrifuged and the deposit is washed with normal saline solution after removing the supernatant. The washed cells are suspended in normal saline and heated in a water bath 65 ̊C for two hours.
Phenol and normal saline are added to give a final concentration of 1200 million Str. Equi organisms per ml. and 0.5 per cent of phenol in the vaccine.

4. Standard-

(a) Description.– It is a slightly opalescent liquid containing dead bacteria in suspension.

(b) Identification.–It protects susceptible animals against infection with Str. Equi.

(c) Sterility Test.–Complies with the test for ―Sterility‖ described in the general monograph on ―Bacterial Vaccines‖, the nutrient broth being replaced by glucose broth.

(e) Safety Test.–Two ponies and two rabbits (each weighing not less than 1 kg.) are inoculated each with 10 ml. and 2 ml. respectively of the final product. The animals should not show any untoward reaction during the period of observation of seven days.

5. Labelling and Storage.–Should comply with the requirements for ―Labelling‖ and ―Storage‖ as laid down in the general monograph on ―Bacterial Vaccines‖

6. Expiry Date.– The date of expiry of potency of the vaccine shall be not more than six months from the date of manufacture.

Old Adjuvant Vaccine against Pasteurellosis in Sheep and Goats.

1. Synonym- Pasteurella Septica Adjuvant Vaccine for ovines and Caprines.

2. Definition- The vaccine is a homogenous suspension of formolised agarwashed Pasteurella septica of ovine origin with liquid paraffin and lanolin.

3. Preparation− Pure growth of highly antigenic strains (R1, R2, R4) in phase I grown separately on nutrient agar medium containing 0.5 per cent yeast extract is washed with 0.5 per cent Normal saline. Equal quantities of the suspension of three strains diluted with Normal saline to contain approximately 2100 million organisms per ml. is pooled together. The safety test of this adjusted pooled suspension is conducted in for white mice each weighing not less than 18 g. and observed for three days before it is mixed with liquid paraffin and lanolin in suitable proportion.

The mixture is blended until a homogenous emulsion is obtained which is filled in suitable containers.

4. Standards:

(a) Description- It is a white thick oily liquid containing dead bacteria in suspension.

(b) Identification- It protects susceptible animals against infection with P. Septica.

(c) Sterility Test- Complies with the test for sterility described in the general monograph on ―Bacterial Vaccines‖.

(d) Safety Test- Six white mice each weighing not less than 18 g. are inoculated intra-peritoneally each with 0.5 ml. of the vaccine. None of the mice should die of Pasteurellosis druing the observation period of seven days.

The vaccine is also inoculated into six sheep and six goats in a dose of 3 ml. each intramuscularly and are observed for a period of seven days. During this period none should die of Pasteurellosis.

(e) Potency Test- Not being done at present.

5. Labelling and Storage- Should comply with the requirements for ―Labelling‖ and ―Storage‖ as laid down in the general monograph on ―Bacterial Vaccines.

6. Expiry Date- The expiry date of Potency of the Vaccine shall be not more than twelve months from the date of manufacture.

1[Multicomponent of Clostridial Vaccine

1. Synonyms. – Combined anaculture of Clostridium perfringens type C and D, C1.
septicum and CI. oedematiens.

2. Definition – It consists of four highly antigenic components containing the toxoids of C. perfringens type D, CI. Perfringens type C, Cl. oedematiens and CI. septicum which are prepared in double strength and then combined in such a proportion that would invoke adequate anti-toxin response in the vaccinated sheep against each antigen incorporated in the vaccine

3. Preparation – The above strains are grown separately in suitable liquid media under conditions which ensure maximum toxin production. The cultures are checked for purity and toxicity in mice. Solution of Formaldehyde I.P. of analytical grade is added to a 0.5 per cent final concentration and formalized cultures are kept at 37oC till the product is sterilized and atoxic. The formalized anacultures are pooled, precipitated by the addition of Aluminium Chloride, 20 per cent solution in distilled water to have a final concentration of the chemical to 10 per cent and pH adjusted to 6.0.the sedimented toxoid is reconstituted to have its original volume in normal saline.

1. Ins. by G.S.R. No. 659(E) ,dt. 31-8-1994

4 Standards :

(a) Description – It is whitish liquid when shaken thoroughly to contain killed bacteria and toxoid in suspension.

(b) Identification – When injected to susceptible animals it stimulates the production of epsilon and beta antitoxins against CI. perfrigens type D and C and also antitoxins against CI. septicum and toxin of CI. Oedematiens.

(c) Sterility Test – Complies with the test of sterility described in general monograph on ―Bacterial Vaccines.‖

(d) Safety Test – Four sheeps each are inoculated with 10 ml. S/C of the product and these are observed for 7 days during which period animals shall not show any local or systemic reaction.

(e) Potency Test – Eight sheep each are inoculated with 2 doses of vaccines S/C at an interval of 21 days and bled on 10th day after 2nd inoculation for collection of serum for assessing the antitoxin titre against each antigen incorporated in the vaccine. The post-inoculation serum should contain not less than 2 i.u. of epsilon and beta antitoxins of CI. perfringens and 2.5 i.u. of CI. septicum antitoxin and 4 i.u. of CI. oedematiens antitoxin.

5. Labelling and storage - Shall comply with the requirements regarding labelling and storage as laid down in the general monograph on ―Bacterial Vaccine‖.

6. Expirty date – The expiry date of potency of vaccine shall not be more than 6 months from the date of manufacture.

Haemorrhagic Septicaemia Vaccine – Alum Treated

1. Synonyms – Pasterulla multocida/(Yersinia Multocida) vaccine – Alum treated.

2. Definition -- The vaccine is a formalized culture of a virulent strain of Pasteurella multocida in nutrient broth treated with potash alum.

3. Preparation -- A highly potent strain of Pasteurella multocida type I in Phase I is grown on nutrient broth at 37oC. The pure growth is killed by the addition of a solution of Formalin I.P in suitable concentration (0.5 per cent). This is treated with Potassium Alum I.P to give a final concentration of 1 per cent.

4. Standard :

(a) Description – It is a white suspension containing dead bacteria and alum.

(b) Identification – It protects susceptible animals against infection with P. multocida.

(c) Sterility Test -- It complies with the test for sterility described under general monograph on ―Bacterial Vaccines‖.

(d) Safety Test -- Four healthy rabbits each weighting 1 to 1.5 kg. are inoculated subcutaneously each with 5 ml. of the product. There shall be no untoward reaction during the period of observation for 7 days except slight local swelling. Alternatively two rabbits and six mice may be employed. The dose for mice will be 0.5 ml.

5. Labelling and Storage :-- Shall comply with the requirements of labelling and storage as laid down in the general monograph on ―Bacterial Vaccines‖.

6. Expiry date – The date of expiry of potency of the vaccine shall be not more than six months from the date of manufacture.]

(B) PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO THE PRODUCTION OF VIRAL VACCINES

1. Definition- (i) This part of the Schedule applies to viral vaccines live or inactivated made from any virus pathogenic to domestic animals and poultry and made from other modified viruses which have any antigenic value.

(ii) For the purpose of this Part of the Schedule, a virus vaccine means a sterile suspension or a freeze dried powder containing the modified living or inactivated virus particles, which in its original unaltered stage, causes disease from which the vaccine derives its name and which has been prepared from the blood or tissues of a suitable host in which it has been grown in vivo or from tissue culture.

2. Staff of Establishment- The establishment in which viral vaccines are prepared must be under the direction and control of an expert in bacteriology with specialized training in virology and sufficient experience in the production of viral vaccines, and he shall be assisted by a staff adequate for carrying out the tests required during the preparation and standardisation of the vaccines.

3. Proper Name- The proper name of any viral vaccine shall be the name of the disease which is caused by the particular virus from which the vaccine is produced followed by the word ―vaccine‖ unless the Schedule otherwise provides, if there is no special provision in the Schedule such other name as is approved by the Licensing Authority. Provided that in the case of the undermentioned preparations the proper name of the vaccine shall be as follows:
(i) Fowl Pox Vaccines, Chick Embryo Virus (Living).
(ii) Fowl Pox Vaccine, Pigeon Pox Virus (Living).
(iii) Horse Sickness Vaccine (Living) (iv) Ranikhet Disease Vaccine (Living) (v) Ranikhet Disease Vaccine F Strain (Living) (vi) Rinderpest Goat Adapted Tissue Vaccine (Living) (vii) Rinderpest Lapinised Vaccine (Living) (viii) Rinderpest Lapinised Avianised Vaccine (Living) (ix) Sheep and Goat Pox Vaccine (Living) (x) Swine fever vaccine (crystal violet) (xi) Swine fever vaccine lapinised (Living).
1[(xii) Foot and Mouth Dieseas Vaccine (Inactivated).
(xiii) Canine Hepatitis Vaccine (Living).] 2[4. Records- The seed virus used in the preparation of vaccine shall, before being used for preparing a batch, be thoroughly tested for purity, safety, sterility and antigenicity by the generally accepted tests applicable to a particular virus. It shall not be more than five passages away from the stock seed virus, unless otherwise prescribed for a particular virus. The stock seed virus shall be maintained by seed-lot system at specified passage level and tested for bacterial, mycoplasmal and extraneous viral contamination. The permanent record which the licensee is required to keep shall include a record of the origin, properties and characteristics of the seed virus from which the vaccines are made.]
5. Tests- Viral vaccine shall be tested for sterility, safety and potency on suitable test animals and for viability in the case of live vaccines.
(a) Sterility Test- All vaccines shall be tested for sterility in accordance with rules 115 to 119. If the vaccine contains added bactericides or bacteriostatic, a quantity of medium sufficient to render the growth inhibitor ineffective is added to the sample or a suitable substance is added in a concentration sufficient to render the growth inhibitor ineffective but not itself to inhibit the growth of micro-organisms.
(b) Safety Test- Suitable laboratory animals or large animals or birds may be employed to test the vaccine for safety. Details of the safety test are given in the individual monograph.
1. Ins. by G.S.R. 659(E) ,dt. 31-8-1994.
2. Subs. by G.S.R. 659(E) ,dt. 31-8-1994.

(c) Potency Test- All virus vaccines for which potency test has been prescribed shall be tested for potency and only those which pass the potency test shall be issued.
Details of the potency test are given in the individual monograph.

6. Storage- Live viral vaccines shall be stored, protected from light at sub-zero temperature as required. Other viral vaccines shall be stored at 2 ̊ C to 4 ̊ C but shall not be frozen.

7. Condition of housing of animals- (i) The animals used in the production of vaccine must be housed in hygienic conditions in premises satisfactory for this purpose.

(ii) Only healthy animals may be used in the production of vaccine. Each animal intended to be used as a source of vaccine must, before being passed for the production of vaccine be subjected to a period of observation in quarantine for at least seven days. During the period of quarantine the animal must remain free from any sign of disease and must be well kept.
1[(iii) The poultry birds from which eggs and cell culture for production of vaccines are obtained should be housed in a manner so as to keep them free from extraneous infection and shall be screened at frequent intervals for common bacterial, mycoplasmal and viral infection.
The record of the tests and their results shall be maintained by the manufacturers.]

8. Labelling- The provisions of ―Labelling‖ as laid down for Bacterial Vaccines shall also apply to Viral Vaccines. The following additional information shall also be included on the label of the outside container:

(i) The name and percentage of bacteriostatic agent contained in the vaccine.

(ii) If the vaccine as issued for sale contains any substance other than the diluent, the nature and strength of such substances.

9. Date of Manufacture- For the purpose of this part of the Schedule, the date of manufacture shall be what is given unless otherwise stated in the individual monograph, as defined in sub-clause (b) of sub-rule (3) of rule 109.

Fowl Pox Vaccine Chick- Embryos Virus (Living)

1. Synonym- Egg adapted Fowl Pox Vaccine (Living).

2. Definition- Fowl-pox Vaccine, Chick-Embryo Virus (Living) is a suspension of a modified living virus (e.g. Mukteswar Strain) prepared from the chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) of the infected embryo and is either freeze dried or is issued as glycerinated liquid vaccine.
3. Preparation- Active chick-embryos obtained from Salmonella pullorum free flock, are used. 1[Twelve to thirteen days old embryos are injected with a suitable dilution of the suspension of the infected membrane (seed virus) of chick embryo adopted fowl pox virus.] The suspension of the stock seed virus is dropped on the CAM. After an incubation at 37 ̊C for a suitable period membranes showing discrete or confluent lesions (pocks) are harvested.
These are homogenised with adequate quantity of antibiotics (penicillin and streptomycin) ampouled in 0.5 ml. quantities and freeze dried.

4. Standard- (a) Description- Light mauve coloured scales.
(b) Identification- When reconstituted vaccine is applied to scarified area of the skin of a fowl it produces characteristic lesions of fowl pox. This product should afford protection against fowl pox.

1. Ins. by. GSR 659(E) , dt. 31-8-1994.

(c) Moisture Content- Moisture Content in the finished product should not exceed
1.0 per cent.
(d) Safety Test- For testing each batch of fowl pox vaccine twelve healthy cockerels, or other suitable young chicken each weighing not less than 400 g. from the same source are taken. This group of twelve birds is immunized at least twenty-one days previous to the test, with fowl pox vaccine. The vaccine under test is reconstituted in 5 ml. of 50 per cent glycerine saline and administered to fowls as follows:- Three of the test birds are injected subcutaneously with 0.8 ml. or 10 times the field doses of the vaccine under test. This group serves to indicate whether the product is free from other viruses and bacteria causing septicaemia or not.
Three of the test birds are injected intratrecheally with 0.3 ml. or 10 times the field dose of vaccine under test. This group serves to indicate whether the product is free from the virus of infectious laryngotracheitis and similar disease.
1[Three of the test birds are injected intranasally with 0.2 ml. of 10 times of the field dose of the vaccine under test. This group serves to indicate whether the product is free from the virus of infectious laryngotracheitis and similar disease.] The three remaining birds serve as controls. They are isolated and kept under observation for twenty-one days. The birds that succumb during the period of twenty-one days are subjected to a careful postmortem examination. The product is withheld from issue until the vaccine and the test birds are shown to be free from the causative agents of any extraneous disease.
(e) Sterility test- Complies with the tests for sterility as described under the general monograph on ―Viral Vaccines‖.
(f) Potency Test- For testing of potency three unsusceptible birds each weighing not less than 400 g. are vaccinated using the field dose by the stick method and examined for ―takes‖. Three weeks after vaccination these birds along with two unvaccinated controls are exposed to challenged virus and observed for fourteen days. The vaccinated birds should not manifest any reaction, while the controls should show active ―takes‖.

5. Labelling- Should comply with the requirement for ―Labelling‖ as laid down in the general monograph on ―Viral Vaccines‖.

6. Storage and Expiry date- Freeze dried vaccine shall be expected to retain its potency for periods at temperatures as specified below:-
-15 ̊ C to - 20 ̊ C–Twenty-four months.
2 ̊ C to 4 ̊ C–Twelve months.
Room temperature– upto one month.

The liquid vaccine shall be expected to retain its potency for periods and temperatures as specified below:
2 ̊ C to 4 ̊C – six months.
Room temperature– seven days.

Ins. by. GSR 659(E) , dt. 31-8-1994.

Fowl- Pox Vaccine, Pigeon Pox Virus (Living)

1. Synonym- Fowl Pox Vaccine (Pigeon pox scab).

2. Definition- Fowl Pox Vaccine, Pigeon-pox Virus (living) consists of pigeon pox virus in scabs collected from artificially infected pigeons and dried.

3. Preparation- Healthy pigeon are scarified on the legs and breast, with a suitable dilution of the suspension of pigeon-pox virus. The pigeons reacting satisfactorily and showing good takes are selected and the superficial skin layer scraped by means of sharp scalpel. The material so collected is freed from feathers, homogenised and dried or freeze dried. The dried pulp is powdered, sieved and ampouled in 0.3 g. quantities and sealed

4. Standard-

(a). Description- Light cream coloured powder.
(b) Identification- When applied to feather follicles by vigorous rubbing, it produces mild reaction in fowls. The product should afford protection to fowls upto six weeks against fowl pox.
(c) Safety Test- For testing a batch of vaccine, twelve healthy cockerels, or other suitable young chicken from the same source are made available at the same time. This group of twelve birds is immunised at least twenty-one days previous to the test with fowl pox vaccine. The vaccine under test is reconstituted in 10 ml. of 50 per cent glycerine saline and administered to fowls as follows: - Three of the test birds are injected subcutaneously with 0.3 ml. or 10 times the field dose of the vaccine to be tested. This group serves to indicate whether the product is free from organisms of septicaemia disease.
Three of the test birds are injected intranasally with 0.2 ml. of the vaccine to be tested. This group serves to indicate whether the product is free from virus of Coryza and similar diseases.
1[Three of the test birds are injected intratricheally with 0.2 ml or 10 times of the field dose of vaccine under test. This group serves to indicate whether the product is free from the virus of infectious laryngotracheitis and similar diseases.] The three remaining birds serve as controls. All the birds under test are isolated and held under observation for twenty-one days. All those that succumb are subjected to careful post-mortem examination. The product is withheld from issue until the vaccine and test birds are shown to be free from the causative agents of any extraneous diseases.
(d) Sterility Test- Complies with the tests for sterility described under the general monograph on ―Viral Vaccines‖.
(e) Potency Test- For testing the potency of a batch of vaccines three susceptible birds each weighing not less than 400 g. are vaccinated using the field dose by the follicular method and examined for ̳takes‘. Three weeks after vaccination these birds and two healthy susceptible controls are exposed to challenge virus and are observed for fourteen days. The vaccinated birds shall manifest no reaction, while the controls must have active ―takes‖.

5. Storage and Labelling- Should comply with the requirements of ̳Labelling‘ as laid down in the general monograph on ̳Viral Vaccines‘.

6. Expiry date- The vaccine shall be expected to retain its potency for periods at temperature as specified below:-

-15 ̊ C to - 20 ̊C-- two years.
2 ̊ C to 4 ̊C-- twelve months.
Room temperature- Upto one month.

1. Ins. by. GSR 659(E) , dt. 31-8-1994.

Fowl Pox Vaccine- Pigeon Pox- Chick Embryos Virus (Living)

1. Synonym- Chick embryo adapted pigeon pox vaccine (Living).

2. Definition- Fowl pox vaccine (Pigeon Pox virus) chick embryo adapted virus (living) is a suspension of a modified living virus prepared from the chorioallantoic membranes of the infected embryos and is freeze dried.

3. Preparation- Active chick embryos obtained from Salmonella Pullorum free stock are used. Twelve to thirteen days old embryos are injected with a suitable dilution of the suspension of the infected membrane (stock seed virus) of chick embryo adapted pigeon pox virus. The suspension of the stock seed virus is dropped on the membrane. The inoculated eggs are incubated at 37 ° C for four days. One of the fourth day embryos that are living, are removed to a refrigerator for chilling for about one hour. Membranes showing discrete lesions (Pocks) are harvested. These are homogenised with adequate quantities of antibiotics, ampouled in 0.5 ml. quantities and freeze dried.

4. Standards-

(a) Description- Light mauve coloured scales.

(b) Identification- When reconstituted vaccine is applied to scarified area of the skin of a fowl, it produces characteristics lesions of Fowl Pox. This product should afford protection against pox.

(c) Moisture content- Moisture content in the finished product should not exceed 1.0 per cent.

(d) Safety test- For testing each batch of chicks aged four to six weeks from the same source are taken. This groups of twelve birds is immunised at least twenty-one days previous to the test, with fowl-pox vaccine. The vaccine under test is reconstituted in 3 ml. of normal saline solution and administered as under:-

Three of the test chicks are injected subcutaneously with 0.3 ml. or 10 times the field dose of the vaccine under test. This group serves to indicate whether the product is free from other viruses and bacteria causing of septicaemia or not.

Three of the test chicks are injected intratracheally with 0.3 ml. or ten times the field dose. This group serves to indicate whether the product is free from the viruses of infections laryngeotracheitis and similar diseases.

Three of the test chicks are injected with 0.2 ml 1/N of the vaccine under test. This group serves to indicate whether the product is free from the virus of coryza and similar diseases.

The remaining three chicks serve as controls. They are isolated and kept under observation for twenty-one days. The birds that succumb during the period of observation are subjected to careful post-mortem examination. The product is withheld from issue until the vaccine and the test birds are shown to be free from the causative agents of any extraneous disease.

In addition to the above, similar groups of pigeons aged six to nine months old are also injected in a similar way to eliminate psittacosis.

(e) Sterility Test- Should comply with the tests for sterility described under the general monograph on ̳Viral Vaccine‘.

(f) Potency test- For testing potency of a batch of vaccine three susceptible chicks of three to four weeks of age are vaccinated by feather forthicle method ( a few forthicles on one leg are injected) and these are examined for ̳takes‘.

Three weeks after vaccination these chicks along with two unvaccinated chicks are exposed to challenge virus (virulent fowl pox virus) and observed for fourteen

days. The vaccinated chicks should not manifest any reaction while controls should show active ̳takes‘.

5. Labelling- Should comply with the requirements for ̳Labelling‘ as laid down in the general monograph on ̳Viral Vaccines‘.

6 Storage- The freeze dried product is expected to retain its potency for periods at temperatures as specified below:

-15 ° C to 20 ° C–two years.

2° C to 4 ° C–twelve months.

Room temperature- up to one month.

Sheep Pox Vaccine (Living)

1. Synonym- Sheep Pox vaccine; Goat pox vaccine.

2. Definition- Sheep pox vaccine consists of sheep pox virus collected from sheep artificially infected with sheep pox virus and freeze dried.

3. Preparation- Healthy yearling sheep are infected artificially by subcutaneous infection on the undersurface of the previously shaved abdomen with 200- 300 cc. of the freeze dried sheep pox virus (seed material) diluted in 1 : 1 Normal saline solution. On the sixth or seventh day after injection oedematous swelling develops in the injected area with thermal reaction. The sheep which develop good swelling are slaughtered and the gelatinous material present under the skin in the infected area is collected under sterile conditions. This material is mixed with 2 parts by volume of sterile peptone broth of pH 7.2 and homogenised.
The homogenised suspension is filtered, ampouled in 0.5 ml. quantities and freeze dried.

4. Standard:

(a) Description- White scales.

(b) Identification- Reconstituted vaccine when applied over the scarified area of the skin of the abdominal region of sheep will produce characteristic local lesion of pox.

(c) Moisture content- The moisture content should not exceed 1.0 per cent.

(d) Safety test- Two rabbits each weighing not less than 1 kg. are injected subcutaneously each with 1 ml. of 1 : 100 dilution of the vaccine in normal saline solution. These animals are observed for fourteen days. The animals should remain normal.

(e) Sterility Test- Complies with the tests for sterility described under the general monograph on ̳Viral Vaccines‘.

(f) Potency Test- Four yearling sheep are vaccinated on the inner surface of the ear by scarification method. The contents of one ampoule of F.D. Sheep Pox vaccine are constituted in 10 cc. of 50 % glycerin saline solution, characteristic ̳takes‘ develop in the scarified area with ulceration and scab formation. Three weeks later these and two more susceptible sheep (Controls) are challenged by scarifying with a suspension of the previous brow of the vaccine of the undersurface of the abdomen. The controls should develop typical lesions of pox and the vaccinated should remain normal.

5.Labelling- Should comply with the requirements of ̳labelling‘ as laid down in the general monograph in ̳Viral Vaccine‘.

6. Storage and expiry date- The vaccine is expected to retain potency for period and temperature as specified below:-

-15 ° C to – 20 ° C– two years

2 ° C to 4 ° C–three months.
Room temperature- Fifteen days.

Horse Sickness Vaccine (Living)

1. Synonym- African Horse Sickness Vaccine, Mouse adapted Polyvalent Horse Sickness Vaccine (Living).

2. Definition- Horse sickness vaccine is a suspension of live mouse adapted strains of Horse Sickness Virus (Onderstepoort) prepared from the brains of infected mice and is freeze dried.

3. Preparation- Thirty to thirty-five days old white mice are infected intracerebrally with 0.05 ml. of a suitable dilution of the seed virus (6 or 7 types, as the case may be). Groups of large numbers of mice are injected separately with each type of the virus and are housed at 27 ° C to 32 ° C. A majority of these become paralytic on the third and fourth day when they are sacrificed and their brains collected and stored at – 15 ° C to – 20 ° C till the day of processing. For preparing the polyvalent vaccine, equal number of brains collected from mice infected with different types of the virus are homogenised with 5-10 times its volume of sterile lactose buffer medium (pH 7.2 ) containing antibiotics. The suspension is centrifuged at 1500 r.p.m. for five minutes. The supernatant liquid is distributed in ampoules in suitable quantities and freeze dried.

4. Standard:

(a) Description- White scaly material.

(b) Identification- This product affords protection to horse against horse sickness.

(c) Safety Test- Four healthy mice thirty to thirty-five days old are injected intraperitoneally with 0.2 ml. of 10:1 dilution of the vaccine and kept under observation for ten days. All the mice should remain normal throughout the period of observation.

(d) Sterility Test- Should comply with the test for sterility described under the general monograph on ̳Viral Vaccines‘.

(e) Viability Test- Each batch of vaccine is titrated in tenfold dilutions using four mice of thirty to thirty-five days old for each dilution. Each mouse is injected intracerebrally with 0.05 ml and kept under observation for ten days. Mortality and survival ratios are noted and LD50 ml is determined. The minimum acceptable titre is 10–4 LD50 per 0.05 ml.

(5) Labelling - Should comply with the requirements of ̳labelling‘ as laid down in the general monograph in ̳Viral Vaccines‘.

(6) Storage- The vaccine may be expected to retain its potency for twelve months if stored – 15 ° C to 20° C and about six months if stored in refrigerator at 2 ° C to 4° C.

Rabies Vaccine (Inactivated)

1. Synonym- Antirabic Vaccine (Inactivated)

2. Definition- Rabies vaccine is a suspension of the brain tissue of animals, that have been infected with a suitable strain of rabies fixed virus, inactivated with phenol or some other suitable agent.

3. The following particulars relating to this vaccine are the same as those relating to Antirabic vaccine described in Part D of Schedule F to these rules, namely:- (i) Strain of fixed Rabies Virus to be used;
(ii) Staff of Establishment;

(iii) Condition and housing of animals;

(iv) Precaution to be observed in preparation;
(v) Records;
(vi) Issue.

4. Preparation- Healthy sheep or any other suitable species of animal are inoculated subdurally or intracerebrally with an appropriate dose of suspension of a suitable strain of rabbit brain passaged rabies fixed virus. The sheep or animals which get paralysed from the sixth day onwards after the inoculation are sacrificed and their brains collected aseptically.
Brain tissue is weighed individually and a suspension of suitable concentration of brain tissue prepared in buffered saline is strained through gauze. The suspension treated with phenol or some other suitable inactivating agent is incubated for an appropriate period.

5. Standard-

(a) Description- A grey to pale yellow opalescent suspension.

(b) Identification- Appropriate doses protect mice against subsequent intracerebral inoculation with suitable strain of fixed rabies virus.
(c) Safety test- Not less than five mice, each weighing at least 18 gm., are inoculated intracerebrally with not less than 0.03 ml. of the suitably diluted vaccine. None of the animals should show symptoms of rabies or die of the disease during period of observation of three weeks.
(d) Sterility Test- Should comply with the test for sterility described under the general monograph on ̳Viral Vaccine‘.

6. Labelling- Should comply with the requirements of ̳Labelling‘ as laid down in the general monograph on ̳Viral Vaccines‘. In addition the label on the container shall indicate the percentage of brain tissue present in the vaccine.

7. Storage- The vaccine may be expected to retain its potency for about six months if stored in refrigerator at 2 ̊ to 4 ° C.
Rabies Vaccine (Living)

1. Definition- Rabies vaccine (living) is a freeze-dried suspension of chick-embryo tissue infected with a suitable attenuated strain of rabies virus.

2. Preparation- It may be prepared by the following method. Seed virus consisting of a suspension of the Flury or other suitable strain of chick adapted virus that has been maintained by passage in chick embryos is injected into the yolk-sacs of fertile eggs incubated for a suitable period. After incubation for a further ten days, the embryos are harvested and grind in water for injection to give 33 percent suspension. The suspension is centrifuged to remove coarse particles and the supernatant fluid is distributed into ampoules in 3 millilitre quantities, and freeze dried. The vaccine is reconstituted immediately before use by adding 3 millilitres of water for injection to the contents of an ampoule.

3. Standard- It complies with the requirements of general standard of viral vaccines for abnormal toxicity, sterility, and labelling with the following additions.

(a) Description- Dry honey-coloured flakes or powder, readily dispersible in water.

(b) Identification- It protects guinea pig against a subsequent inoculation of rabies street virus. It is distinguished from the inactivated Rabies vaccine by its ability to produce rabies encephalitic on intracerebral injection into mice.

(c) Safety- The guinea pigs used in the test for potency should not show any marked local or systemic reaction during the three weeks following injection with the vaccine.

(d) Sterility Test- Complies with the tests for sterility described under the general monograph on ̳Viral Vaccines‘.

(e) Potency Test- The contents of an ampoule are dispersed in water for injection to give a 5 per cent suspension and not fewer than twenty guinea pigs, drawn from a uniform stock and each weighing 350 g. to 500 g., are each injected intramuscularly with
0.25 ml. of this suspension. Three weeks later, these guinea pigs and an equal number of similar unvaccinated control guinea pigs are each inoculated with 0.1 ml. of a suitable dilution of canine salivary gland suspension of street virus which is maintained as a 20 per cent suspension at 70 ° C or lower. The guinea pigs are observed for thirty days; not less than 80 per cent of the control guinea-pigs die of rabies and not less than 70 per cent of the vaccinated guinea-pigs are protected.

4. Storage- Freeze-dried vaccine should be stored at refrigeration temperatures of 2 ° C to 4 ° C.

5. Labelling- The life of the vaccine at room temperature and at refrigeration temperature should be stated on the label.

6. (a) Action and uses- Rabies vaccine (living) is used for the prophylactic inoculation of dogs against rabies; one injection should provoke a serviceable immunity lasting for at least a year. The vaccine has been used to a limited extent on cattle.

(b) Dose- By intramusclar injection: Dogs, the contents of one ampoule reconstituted in 3 ml. of water for injection; cattle five times the dog dose.

Ranikhet Disease Vaccine (Living)

1. Synonym- New Castle Disease Vaccine (Living); pheumoenteritis Vaccine (Living).

2. Definition- Ranikhet Disease vaccine is a suspension of a modified living virus e.g.
(Mukteswar strain) prepared from infected embryos and fluids and is freeze dried.
3. Preparation- Good fertile eggs obtained from Salmonella pullorum free flock are incubated in an egg incubator. Ten days old vigorous embryos are infected with 0.1 ml. of a suitable dilution of a suspension of the virus. Inoculation is done in the allantoic cavity.
Embryos are incubated at a suitable temperature. Eggs showing dead embryos twenty-four hours after incubation are discarded. After forty-eight hours incubation the eggs are candled and those showing dead embryos are chilled for a suitable period of time, while embryos alive beyond forty-eight hours are discarded. The fluids and embryos are then collected and spot haemogglutination carried out. The material is homogenised in a blender and ampouled in aliquots of 0.5 ml. quantities and freeze-dried.

4. Standards- (a) Description- Light brown scales.
(b) Identification- This product affords protection to fowls against Ranikhet Disease.
(c) Safety Test- For testing each batch of freeze dried Ranikhet Disease Vaccine, twelve healthy young chickens, all from the same source each weighing not less than 100 g. are taken and immunised against Ranikhet Disease. Fourteen days later, these birds, are tested as follows with the contents of one ampoule suspended in 100 ml. of normal saline.
Three of the test birds are injected subcutaneously with 0.1 ml. equivalent to ten times the field dose of the vaccine to be tested. This group serves to indicate whether the product is free from viruses or organisms of speticaemia disease.
Three of the test birds are injected intratracheally with 0.1 ml. equivalent to ten times the field dose of he vaccine to be tested. This group serves to indicate whether the product is free from the virus of infectious laryngotracheitis, 1[***] and similar diseases.
The three remaining birds serve as controls.
2[Three of the test birds are injected intranasally with 0.2 ml of the vaccine to be tested. This group serves to indicate whether the product is free from virus of Coryza and similar diseases.] All the treated birds and controls are observed daily for fourteen days. All the test birds that succumb are subjected to careful postmortem examination. The product is not issued until the birds under test are shown to be free from the causative agents of any extraneous diseases.
(e) Sterility Test- Should comply with the test for sterility described in the general monograph on ̳Viral Vaccine‘.

1. The word ―Coryza‖ omitted by. GSR 659(E) ,dt.. 31-8-1994.
2. Ins. by G.S.R. 659(E) ,dt.. 31-8-1994

(f) Potency Test- Four susceptible birds eight to twelve weeks old and each weighing not less than 400 g. are vaccinated by injecting subcutaneously 1 ml. of a 10-5 dilution of the product. Two weeks after vaccination these birds and four non-protected birds are challenged by injecting subcutaneously each with 1.0 ml. of a 1: 100 dilution of virulent virus (liver and spleen suspension) or 1.0 ml. of a 1 : 100 dilution of fluid from the embryo infected with virulent Ranikhet Disease virus. The non-protected birds should show symptoms of Ranikhet Disease and die and all the protected birds should remain normal during an observation period of fourteen days.
5. Labelling- Should comply with the requirements of ̳Labelling as laid down in the general monograph on ̳Viral Vaccines‘.

6. Storage- The vaccine when stored at – 15° C to 20° C. may be expected to retain the potency for about one year and about three months if stored in a refrigerator at 2° C to 4° C. The product should not be used if stored for more than ten days outside the refrigerator.

Ranikhet Disease Vaccine F strain (Living)

1. Synonyms- New castle disease vaccine F Strain (Living).

2. Definition- Ranikhet disease vaccine F. strain is a suspension of a naturally modified living virus (F strain) prepared from the infected embryos, devoid of beaks and eyes and fluids in a frozen state.

3. Preparation- Good fertile eggs obtained from Salmonella pullorum free flock are incubated in an egg incubator. Eight days old vigorous embryos are infected with 0.1 ml. of 1 : 100 suspension of Ranikhet disease vaccine F strain virus. Inoculation is done via the allantoic cavity. Embryos are incubated at 37° C. Eggs are candled every day upto four days and the dead ones are discarded. Final candling of the embryos is carried out on the fourth day and only the living ones are chilled in a refrigerator for one hour. The fluids embryos are collected separately. The fluids are tested for spot haemagglutination and sterility test is carried out. The beaks and eye balls of the embryos are removed. The materials are homogenised with adequate quantities of antibiotics in a cool warning blender and ampouled in aliquots of 0.5 ml. quantity and freeze dried.

4. Standard-

(a) Description- Light brown scales.
(b) Identification- This product affords protection to baby chicks against Ranikhet disease.
(c) Moisture content- The moisture content should not exceed 1[1.0] per cent.
(d) Potency test- For testing each batch of the vaccine twelve one-day old chicks are given two drops 1/N o the field dose of the vaccine (5 ampoules selected at random may be reconstituted in 50 ml.) of cold normal saline solution. These are observed for fourteen days and the vaccinated chicks should remain normal throughout the period of observation. This serves the safety test also.
On the fourteenth days the vaccinated chicks are challenged two drops with 1:50 virulent Ranikhet disease virus alongwith 8 control chicks. Four of the controls receive two drops 1/N of the virulent virus while the rest of the four receive 0.5 ml. of the virulent virus. The control chicks should succumb to the challenge virus showing symptoms of Ranikhet Disease while the protected chicks should remain normal throughout the observation period of fourteen days.
(e) Sterility Test- Should comply with the tests for sterility described in the general monograph on ̳Viral Vaccines‘

5. Labelling- Should comply with the requirements of ―Labelling‖ as laid down in the general monograph on ̳Viral Vaccines‘.

6. Storage- The vaccine when stored at – 15 ° C to –20 ° C may be expected to retain the potency for about one year and about three months if stored in a refrigerator at 2 ° C to 4° C. When removed from the refrigerator, the product should not be used later than ten days.

1. Ins. by G.S.R. 659(E) ,dt.. 31-8-1994

Rinderpest Goat adapted Tissue Vaccine (Living)

1. Synonym- Goat-adapted Cattle Plague Vaccine; Goat Tissue Vaccine (Living).

2. Definition- Rinderpest Goat-adapted Tissue Vaccine is the homogenised freeze dried preparation of spleen pulp of goats artificially infected with the suitable strain of rinderpest virus.

3. Preparation- Healthy susceptible goats are quarantined for a period of ten days.
After this period a batch of selected goats are injected subcutaneously with 2 ml. of a suitable dilution of the suspension of the seed virus. The donor goats are sacrificed after a suitable period when the titre of the virus in the animal body is expected to be maximum, usually four days, and the spleen from animals free from any pathological change or signs are collected under sterile conditions. Smear from each spleen is examined microscopically to exclude spleen which are contaminated from the production batch.

The spleen is freed from fat and fascia and is blended into a smooth pulp in a grinder.
The pulp is spread on a shallow dish of glass or stainless steel and is freeze dried.

The freeze dried pulp is then ground into a fine powder and sieved. The powder is ampouled in 0.25 g. or 0.125 g. quantities and freeze dried.

4. Standard:

(a) Description- Dark brown or chocolate coloured scales or powder.

(b) Identification- The product affords protection to susceptible animals against rinderpest.

(c) Moisture content- Not more than 1.0 per cent.

(d) Safety Test- Each batch of vaccine shall be tested for safety in laboratory animals and cattle or buffalo calves as follows:-

(i) Small animals- At least two guinea pigs each weighing 300 g. to 450 g.
and two adult rabbits each weighing 1 kg. to 1.5 kg. should be injected each with 1 ml. of 1: 100 suspension of the vaccine subcutaneously and kept under observation for seven days. None of the animals should die. Alternatively, a batch of six white mice each weighing not less than 18 g. may be used, each mouse receiving 0.5 ml. of a dilution 1 : 100 suspension subcutaneously. None of the animals should die.

(ii) Large animals- Either cattle of good grade of susceptibility (hill cattle) or buffalo calves may be employed. For each batch of vaccine, three animals should be injected subcutaneously with 1 ml. of 1 : 8000 dilution of the vaccine.
These animals should be kept under observation for twelve to fourteen days. None of the animals should show any untowards reactions.

(e) Sterility Test- Complies with the tests for sterility described under the general monograph in ̳ Viral Vaccines‘.

(f) Potency Test- The animals receiving 1 ml. of 1 : 8000 dilution of vaccine used under safety test mentioned above and kept under observation for fourteen days, should be challenged with 1 ml. of 1 per cent suspension of stock Rinderpest Virulent virus. None of the animals should die of rinderpest within a period of ten days. This test serves as a short potency test for each of the batches.
For conducting a detailed potency test the following procedure may be followed:- Dilution 1: 8000, 1: 12,000 and 1 : 16,000 shall be tested and for each dilution three susceptible cattle or buffalo calves should be used. Each animal is inoculated subcutaneously with 1 ml. of a dilution of the vaccine, followed twelve to fourteen days later with a standard challenge dose of virulent rinderpest bull virus containing

in 1 ml. of a 1 : 100 suspension of spleen tissue. Two unvaccinated bovines, each receiving the same quantity of the challenge dose acts as controls. These are kept under observation for fourteen days. The end point of protection titre is assessed on the death or survival rate and the dose contained in one gramme of vaccine calculated on the basis of 20 to 40 minimum protective doses being equivalent to one vaccinating dose.

(g) Virulence and Viability Test- Two to four goats each weighing not less than 18 kg. are injected with 2 ml. of 1 : 100 suspension of the vaccine and kept under observation for ten days. These animals should show reaction characterised by pyrexia (rise of about 2 ̊ C) anorexia and dullness.

5. Labelling- Should comply with the requirement of ̳Labelling‘ as laid down in the general monograph on ̳ Viral Vaccines‘.

6. Storage- The vaccine may be expected to retain its potency for twelve months if stored at - 15 ̊ C to -20 ̊ C or about three months if stored at 2 ̊C to 4 ̊ C.

Rinderpest Lapinised Vaccine (Living)

1. Synonym- Rabbit Adapted Cattle Plague Vaccine (Living) Lapinised Vaccine (Living).

2. Definition- Rinderpest lapinised vaccine is a suspension of a modified living virus (e.g. Nakamura III Strain) prepared with the blood, spleen and mesenteric lymph glands of infected rabbits and is freeze dried.

3. Preparation- Adult rabbits possibly from a known stock, each weighing not less than 1 kg. free from cocidiosis and snuffles, are injected intravenously with 1 ml. of a suitable dilution of a suspension of the stock seed virus. Donor rabbits are sacrificed after a suitable period when the titre of the virus in the animals is expected to be the maximum usually the third day.

Ten millilitres of blood is collected from each rabbit in a defibrinating flask under aseptic condition. Later the animals are sacrificed and the spleen and mesenteric lymph glands collected. Each rabbit is subjected to a thorough post-mortem examination to observe lesions of rinderpest infection.

After harvesting, the blood and the organs (spleen and glands) are homogenised in a suitable proportion if necessary. Adequate quantities of penicillin and streptomycin may be added. The homogenized material is ampouled in suitable quantities and freeze dried.

4. Standard-

(a) Description- Dark chocolate coloured mass.

(b) Identification- This product affords protection to susceptible animals against rinderpest.

(c) Moisture content- Not more than 1.0 per cent.

(d) Safety Test- For testing a batch 2 guinea pigs each weighing not less than 300 g. are injected subcutaneously with 1 ml. of a 1 : 100 suspension of the vaccine.
Alternatively, a group of six white mice each weighing not less than 18 g. is used. Each animal receives subcutaneously 0.5 ml. of 1 : 100 suspension of the vaccine. None of the test animals should die within a period of seven days.

(e) Sterility Test- Should comply with the tests for sterility described in the general monograph on ̳Viral Vaccines‘. If antibiotics have been added the inoculum should be neutralised before doing the test.

(f) Potency Test- Dilution 1: 100, 1 : 200, 1 : 400 and 1 : 800 shall be tested and for each dilution 2 susceptible cattle ( hill bulls) or buffalo calves should be used. Each animal is inoculated subcutaneously with 1 ml. of a dilution of the vaccine, followed twenty-one days later with a standard challenge dose of a virulent rinderpest bulls virus contained in 1 ml. of a 1 : 100 suspension of spleen tissue. Two unvaccinated bovines each receiving the same quantity of the challenge virus serve as controls. These animals are kept under observation for fourteen days. The end point of the protecting titre is assessed on the death or survival rate and the dose contained in one gramme of vaccine calculated on the basis of twenty minimum protective doses being equivalent to one vaccinating dose.

(g) Virulence and Viability Test- Four rabbits each weighing 1 to 1.5 kg. are injected subcutaneously with 1 ml. of 1 : 100 suspension of the vaccine. The animals should react typically showing all the symptoms of rinderpest in rabbits.

5. Labelling- Should comply with the requirements of ̳Labelling‘ as laid down in the general monograph on ̳Viral Vaccines‘.

6. Storage- The vaccine may be expected to retain its potency for six months if stored at 15 ̊C to –20 ̊C or about a month if stored at 2 ̊C to 4 ̊C.

Rinderpest Lapinised Avianised Vaccine (Living)

1. Synonym- Lapinised Avianised Vaccine (Living).

2. Definition- Rinderpest Lapinised Avianised Vaccine is a suspension of a modified live rinderpest virus of low virulence prepared either with the whole chick embryo or the viscera of the infected chick embryo.

3. Preparation- Twelve or thirteen days old active chick embryos from a flock free from Salmonella pullorum infection are injected intravenously with a suitable dilution of the suspension of the stock seed virus in six per cent glucose solution. The embryos are incubated at 38.5 ̊ C for five days. At the end of this incubation period, eggs which show living embryos are selected for the preparation of the vaccine. The viscera of the chicks are harvested, care being taken to reject the gizzard and gall bladders. The material is homogenised in a blender with adequate quantities of antibiotics (penicillin and streptomycin added if necessary), and primary freeze dried done. This freeze dried material is ground into a fine powder, ampouled in suitable quantities and finally subjected to secondary freeze drying and sealed under vacuum.

4. Standard-

(a) Description- Pale cream or yellow coloured sterile powder.

(b) Identification- This product affords good grade of immunity to susceptible animals against rinderpest.

(c) Moisture content- Not more than 1.0 per cent.

(d) Safety Test- For testing each batch, a group of six mice each weighing not less than 18g. is used. Each mouse is injected subcutaneously with 0.5 ml. of a 1 : 100 suspension. Alternatively, two guinea pigs each weighing not less than 300 g. and two rabbits each weighing not less than 1 kg. are injected with 1 ml. of 1 : 100 suspension subcutaneously. These animals should not show any untoward reaction during the period of observation for seven days.

(e) Sterility Test- Should comply with the test or sterility as laid down in the general monograph on ̳Viral Vaccines‘.

(f) Potency Test- Healthy highly susceptible cattle (hill bulls) or buffalo calves should be used for testing the potency of each batch of vaccine in suitable dilution. For each dilution two highly susceptible animals should be used. Each animal is inoculated

subcutaneously with 1 ml. of a dilution of the vaccine, followed twenty-one to twentyeight days after with a standard challenge dose of a virulent rindepest bull virus contained in 1 ml. of a 1 : 100 suspension of spleen tissue. Two unvaccinated bovines, each receiving the same quantity of the challenge virus serve as controls. All these animals are kept under observation for fourteen days. The end point of protective titre is assessed on the death or survival rate and the dose contained in one gramme of vaccine calculated on the basis of forty minimum protective doses being equivalent to one vaccinating dose.

5. Labelling- Should comply with the requirements of ̳Labelling‘ as laid down in the general monograph on ̳Viral Vaccines‘.

6. Storage and Expiry date- The vaccine shall be expected to retain its potency for the period at temperatures as specified below:-

-15 ̊ C to – 20 ̊ C .. Six months.

2 ̊ C to 4 ̊ C . .. One month.

Sheep and Goat Pox Vaccine (Living)

1. Synonym- Sheep Pox Vaccine. Goat Pox Vaccine (Living).

2. Definition- Sheep and Goat Pox Vaccine consists of the virus contained in the scabs collected from sheep artificially infected with the virus.

3. Preparation- Healthy yearling sheep are infected artificially on the shaved portion of the abdomen with a suitable dilution of the suspension of the stock seed virus 50 per cent glycerine saline solution. The material from the semi-dried areas where the pock lesions are evident is collected and dried over calcium chloride or phophorus pentoxide under vacuum.
Dry scabs are powdered, sieved, ampouled in suitable quantities and sealed.

4. Standard:

(a) Description- Light cream coloured powder.

(b) Identification- This product when applied to scarified area of the skin of the sheep or goats produces characteristic local lesions of pox and should afford protection to sheep and goat against Sheep and Goat Pox.

(c) Safety Test- Two rabbits each weighing not less than 1 kg. are injected subcutaneously each with 1 ml. of a 1 : 100 dilution of the vaccine in normal saline solution. These animals are observed for fourteen days. The animals should remain normal.

(d) Sterility Test- Complies with the tests for sterility described under the general monograph on ̳Viral Vaccines‘.

(e) Potency Test- Four yearling sheep are inoculated with 1 : 100 suspension of the vaccine in 50 per cent glycerine saline on a scarified area on the abdomen. Fourteen days later, these and two more susceptible sheep are inoculated by the same method with stock virus and observed for a period of fourteen days. The control animals should develop typical lesions of pox and vaccinated animals should remain normal.

5. Labelling- Should comply with requirement of ̳Labelling‘ as laid down in the general monograph on ̳Viral Vaccines‘.

6. Storage and Expiry date- The vaccine shall be expected to retain its potency for period at temperatures as specified below:-
-15 ̊ C to – 20 ̊ C : Twenty months.
2 ̊ C to 4 ̊ C : Three months.
Room Temperature : Fifteen days.

Fowl Spirochaetosis Vaccine ( Chick Embryo Origin)

1. Synonym- Tick Fever Vaccine.

2. Definition- The vaccine consists of a merthiolated suspension of chorioallantoic membrane, internal viscera and blood of chick embryos infected with a vaccine strain of spirochaetes and freeze dried.

3. Preparation- Eleven days old developing chick embryos are infected with 0.2 ml. of sterile fresh blood containing spirochaetosis via the chorioallantoic membrane. The inoculated embryos are incubated at 37 ̊C and candled daily and the dead one are discarded. On the seventh day the living embryos are chilled in the refrigerator for two hours. The chilled embryos are harvested separately and necrotic lesions in liver noted. Representative samples of blood should be examined for teaming spirochaetes. The internal viscera, chorio-allantoic membranes and the blood are collected. The material is pooled, weighed and held in deep freeze at – 15 ̊C to –20 ̊C for a period of one week. Thereafter the material is blended with equal quantity of Merthiolate (final concentration of merthiolate in the suspension should be 1 : 10, 000) thoroughly for three times, each time the motor running at full speed and the vaccine is ampouled in 2 ml. quantities and freeze dried.

4. Standard-

(a) Description- Light brownish scales.

(b) Identification- The vaccine affords protection when inoculated into the fowls against spirochetosis.

(c) Moisture content- The moisture content should not exceed 1.0 per cent.

(d) Safety and potency test- Six healthy cockerals ten to twelve weeks old are used for this purpose. Each ampoule of vaccine is reconstituted in 10 ml. of cold distilled water and the six cockerals are injected intramuscularly each with 1 ml. of the reconstituted vaccine and the birds are observed for a period of ten days and the vaccinated birds should remain normal throughout the period of observation. The vaccinated birds are challenged with 0.2 ml. intramuscularly with virulent spirochaete blood along with two susceptible controls. Temperature and blood smear examination of the challenged birds and controls should be carried out daily for a period of ten days. The blood smears of vaccinated birds should remain negative for spirochaetes during the entire period of observation. The controls should react and show spirochaetes in the blood.

(e) Sterility Test- Complies with the tests for sterility described in the general monograph on ̳ Bacterial Vaccine‘.

5. Labelling- Should comply with the requirement of ̳Labelling‘ as laid down in the general monograph on ̳Viral Vaccines‘.

6. Storage- The vaccine when stored at –15 ̊C to – 20 ̊C may be expected to retain the potency for about one year and about two months if stored in refrigerator at 2 ̊C to 4 ̊C.

Swine Fever Vaccine Crystal Violet

1. Synonym- Crystal Violet Swine fever vaccine, Hog Cholera Vaccine.

2. Definition- Swine fever vaccine, crystal violet is a suspension of blood of swine that have been infected with a suitable virulent antigenic strain of swine fever virus, inactivated with 0.25 per cent crystal violet ethylene glycol at 37 ̊C for fourteen days.

3. Preparation- Susceptible healthy pigs of six to seen months of age belonging to a well established strain or bred are used. Body weight of these animals at this age may vary according to the breed but optimum weight is considered as between 75 to 100 kg. Animals used for production may be procured from well established farms and kept under quarantine

for fourteen days. These are injected intramuscularly with a suitable dilution of the suspension of the virulent blood viruses. Bleeding of the clinically injected animals is carried out on the sixth day. The defibrinated blood from each animal is strained and stored separately in sterile glass containers. To the four parts of defibrinated blood, one part of 0.25 per cent crystal violet- ethylene glycol is added and the suspension after thorough mixing, is stored at 37 ̊ C ( +0.5) for two weeks. The product is filled in 20 ml. volumes in sterile vials and labelled on the completion of tests.

4. Standard-

(a) Description- Very dark violet suspension.

(b) Identification- This product affords protection against swine fever but not against African Swine Fever.

(c) Safety Test- Two young pigs weighing about 15 to 30 kg. are injected subcutaneously each with 40 ml. of the vaccine batch to be tested. In addition, one unvaccinated susceptible pig is placed in contact.

(d) Sterility Test- Should comply with the test for sterility described under general monograph on ̳Viral Vaccines‘.

(e) Abnormal toxicity test- Two guinea pigs are given 1 ml. of vaccine intramuscularly.

Two guinea pigs are given 2 ml. of the vaccine intraperitoneally.
Two mice are given 0.5 ml. of the vaccine subcutaneously.

(f) Potency Test- Four susceptible pigs weighing between 20-30 kg. are injected with 5 ml. of the vaccine subcutaneously. After twenty-one days these are challenged with 1 ml. of suitable dilution of the challenge virus subcutaneously. The dose must contain at least 1000 minimum infective doses. At least two control pigs should be used.

5. Labelling- - Should comply with requirement of ̳Labelling‘ as laid down in the general monograph on ̳Viral Vaccines‘.

6. Storage- The vaccine may be expected to retain its potency for twelve months if stored in refrigerator at 2 ̊C to 4 ̊C.

Swine Fever Vaccine Lapinised (Living)

1. Synonym- Lapinised swine fever vaccine, freeze dried lapinised swine fever vaccine.

2. Definition- Swine fever lapinised vaccine consists of the suspension of a modified live swine fever virus prepared from spleens of infected rabbits and is freeze dried.

3. Preparation- Healthy adult rabbits weighing approximately 1000 gms. or over, free from coccidiosis snuffles etc. are injected intravenously with a suitable dose of a dilution of the modified rabbit adapted virus. Rabbits are sacrificed at the height of reaction and spleens are collected with sterile precautions. The collection is later homogenised in a blender using ten per cent yolk phosphate buffer as a diluent. The suspension is ampouled in 0.5 ml.
quantities and freeze dried.

4. Standard-

(a) Description- Light scales.

(b) Identification- This product affords protection against swine fever.

(c) Moisture content- The moisture content should not exceed 1.0 per cent.

(d) Safety Test- Six mice are injected each with 0.5 ml. of a 1 : 100 suspension of the vaccine. These are kept under observation for seven days. Non should die.

(e) Viability Test- Two healthy rabbits are injected intramuscularly with 1 ml. of 1 : 100 suspension of the vaccine. These animals show thermal reaction.

(f) Sterility Test- Should comply with the test for sterility described under the general monograph on ̳Viral Vaccines‘.

(g) Potency Test- The vaccine batch under test should be tested on susceptible healthy pigs weighing between 20-30 kg. Two animals for each dilution may be used.
The dilutions tested are 1 : 10, 1 : 25, 1 : 50 and 1 : 100. One millilitre of each of these dilutions is injected subcutaneously. One healthy, susceptible, unvaccinated in contact animal should be kept along with the vaccinated animals.

Fourteen to twenty-one days later these animals along with two controls are injected subcutaneously with 1 ml. of the challenge virus containing at least 1000 minimum infective doses.

5. Labelling- Should comply with requirements of ̳Labelling‘ as laid down in the general monograph on ̳Viral Vaccines‘.

6. Storage- The vaccine may be expected to retain its potency for six months if stored at temperature ranging between – 10 ̊ C to - 15 ̊ C and for seven days at 2 ̊ C to 4 ̊ C in the refrigerator.

1[Foot and Mouth Disease Vaccine (Inactivated)

1. Synonym. – Inactivated Tissue culture mono or polyvalent Foot and Mouth Disease Vaccine.

2 Definition. – Foot and Mouth Disease Vaccine is a liquid product or preparation containing one or more types of foot and mouth disease virus which have been inactivated in such a way that its immunogenic property is maintained. It may also contain an adjuvant. The vaccine is described as monovalent, bivalent, trivalent or polyvalent depending on the number of types of virus used.

3. Preparation. – The virus is propagated in suitable cell culture. The cell culture is infected with an appropriate inoculum of virus and incubated at a suitable temperature for multiplication of virus. The virus is harvested and cellular debris removed by filteration.
Inactivation is carried out by a suitable agent such as formaldehyde solution or aziridine compound. The adjuvant may be aluminium hydroxide and/or saponin. In case of inactivated gel vaccine the antigen is concentrated by sedimentation at plus 4 degree C. For preparing a polyvalent vaccine, monovalent antigens are mixed in appropriate quantities to give the final mixture which is the formulated vaccine.
4. Standards :

(a) Description :- Aluminium hydroxide gel vaccines settle down to variable degree on storage leaving the supernatant clear.

1. Ins. by G.S.R. No. 659(E) ,dt.. 31-8-1994.

(b) Identification – It protects cattle against Foot and Mouth Disease due to homologous type/subtype of virus.

(c) Sterility test – It shall comply with the tests for sterility as prescribed under the ―general monograph on ―Viral Vaccines‖.

(d) Safety test - The test is carried out on fully susceptible cattle not less than 12 months of age and which have not been sensitized either by vaccination or previous infection. Inoculate 3 susceptible cattles each with 2 ml. of finished product at multiple sites on tongue by intradermal route and observe for 4 days. The same animals are inoculated on 4th day with 3 cattle doses subcutaneously and are observed for a further period of 6 days. The animals should not develop any signs of FMD and remain normal.

(e) Potency test – Each batch of the vaccine is to be tested in susceptible cattle of not less than 15 months of age. The potency test in cattle can be done either by :–

(i) PD50 Method : The vaccine shall be tested by the determination of PD50 in susceptible cattle by challenging animals vaccinated with appropriate dilution of the vaccine made in adjuvanted or non-adjuvanted diluent as appropriate.

A minimum of 5 animals should be used per dilution and 2 unvaccinated animals to be included as controls to the challenge. All animals are needle challenged with 10,000 ID50 of the homologous strain of virus by inoculation on the tongue on the 21st day of post-vaccination.

The control animals are to be similarly challenged. Animals are observed for 10 days for the development of lesions. Unprotected animals show generalised lesions due to FMD. Control animals must shown generalized lesions. From the number of animals protected in each group the PD50 content of the vaccine is calculated. The vaccine passes the test if an observed PD50 value of 3 or greater is obtained in the test.

(ii) Percentage protection method in which groups of ten health susceptible cattle are each injected subcutaneously with the vaccinating dose and 14 – 21 days later the cattle are challenged by intradermal injection into three separate sites on the tongue with 10,000 ID50 of the strain of virus used in the preparation of the vaccine. The vaccine can be passed if atleast seven out of the ten in the group are protected against the development of generalized infection whereas all the controls should react by developing primary and secondary lesions observable in the mouth and feet.

For other reasons if cattle testing is not possible then the potency of the vaccine may be assed in guineapigs either by Lucam ̳C‘ index or PD50 method by challenging those which have been previously vaccinated, provided that the correlation has been established between guinea pig challenge test and cattle challenge results.

The estimation of the serum neutralizing antibody titre cattle may be considered as a supportive test to evaluate potency of vaccine.

However, potency testing of vaccines, in cattle, of batches whenever by other accepted methods of testing is in doubt, at aleast one out of every five batches, be undertaken.

5 Labelling :- It is labelled as described under the requirements of ̳labelling‘ as laid down in the general monograph, with the additional requirements that the label on the container states the virus types used in the preparation.
6. Storage :- It should be protected from the light and stored between 4o C to 8o C. Under these conditions it may be expected to retain its potency for not less than 12 months. Freezing of aluminium hydroxide vaccine must be avoided. The frozen product will not be fit for use.

Canine Hepatitis Vaccine (Living)

1. Synonyms : Infectious Canine Hepatitis Vaccine (Living), Canine Hepatitis Cell Culture Vaccine.

2. Definition : Canine Hepatitis Vaccine (Living) is a freeze dried preparation of tissue culture fluid containing the cell culture adopted canine hepatitis virus.

3. Preparation : Canine hepatitis vaccine shall be prepared from virus bearing cell culture fluid.

Only stock seed virus which has been established as pure, safe and immunogenic shall be used in the preparation of the vaccine.

Immunogenicity test : Each lot of stock seed virus shall be tested for immunogenicity as follows :

Thirteen canine hepatitis susceptible dogs, 8-14 weeks old shall be used for the test (10 vaccinates and 3 controls). Blood samples may be drawn from these animals and individual serum samples tested for the presence of antibodies, against canine hepatitis virus. Ten dogs shall be injected subcutaneously with predetermined quantity of the virus and remaining 3 dogs are kept as unvaccinated controls. The dose calculation will be based on virus titration in suitable cell culture system. Not less than 14 days post vaccination, the vaccinated and control shall each be challenged intravenously with virulent infectious canine hepatitis virus and observed daily for 14 days. At least 2 out of 3 controls should die and the survivors shall show the clinical signs of canine hepatitis.
Nine out of ten vaccinated dogs shall survive and shall not show any signs of infectious canine hepatitis during the observation period.

The stock seed virus shall be tested once in 5 years and maintained under standard conditions as prescribed.

The stock seed virus may be inoculated on a suitable tissue culture system and may be incubated for five to seven days.

The tissue culture fluid is then harvested and titrated in cell culture system for virus content. After appropriate dilution and pooling, the material is stored at minus 20o C until freeze dried. Each vaccine dose shall contain not less than 103.5 TCID50 dose.

4. Standards :-

(a) Description. – The dried product is a pinkish cream material readily dispersible in water. The reconstituted vaccine is a pinkish liquid.

(b) Identification.- It causes characteristic cytopathic effect in dog, pig and ferret kidney monolayers. This can be neutralized by specific antiserum. When inoculated into dogs, the development of specific neutralizing antibodies can be demonstrated by suitable serological tests.

(c) Moisture content.- In the finished product moisture content shall not exceed 1.0 per cent.

(d) Sterility Test.-- Shall comply with the tests of sterility as described under the general monograph on ―Viral Vaccines‖.

(e) Safety Test.-- Mouse safety test – Vaccine prepared for use as recommended on

the label shall be tested. Eight mice shall be inoculated intracerebrally with 0.03 ml and 8 mice shall be inoculated intraperitoneally with 0.5ml. Both the groups shall be observed for seven days. If unfavourable reaction attributable to the product occurs in two or more mice in either group during their observation period, the batch is unsatisfactory.

(f) Dog Safety Test.-- Each of the two susceptible pups aged 8 – 14 weeks shall be injected with vaccine equivalent of 10 vaccinating doses from the batch reconstituted with sterile diluent and administered in the manner recommended on the label and observed for 21 days. None of the pups shall show any unfavourable reaction during the period of observation.

(g) Potency test, Virus Titration: – Samples of finished product shall be tested for virus titre in suitable cell culture system. The batch shall have a virus titre of not less than 103.5 TCID50 dose.

(h) Potency test in dog:– Two healthy susceptible dogs of 8-14 weeks of age shall be injected subcutaneously with one Vaccine dose. 14 days after vaccination, specific neutralizing antibodies from both the dogs shall be demonstrable by serological tests.

Labelling: Shall comply with the requirement for labelling as laid down in the general monograph on ―Viral Vaccines‖.

6 Storage: The dry product shall be stored at temperature of minus 20o C or below.
.
The vaccine is expected to retain its potency for about 6 months in the freezing chamber of the refrigerator (temperature) approximately minus 8oC

Duck Plague Vaccine

Definition.- Duck plague vaccine is a suspension of modified living virus prepared from infected chick embryos.

2 Preparation.- Fresh fertile hen‘s eggs obtained from salmonella free flocks are . incubated in an incubator. Nine days old embryos are injected with
0.2 ml of the suitable dilution ( 1 in 100) of the suspension of the virus on the CAM and incubated at 37o C for 5 days post-inoculation. Dead embryos of the 3rd, 4th and 5th days post-inoculation are harvested.
The embryos (devoid of head and legs). Clear fluid and the membranes are collected and homogenized in a Blender, ampoulded in 0.5ml quantities and freeze dried.

3 Standards:-

(a) Description.- Light brown scales.

(b) Identification.- This product affords protection to the ducks against duck plague.

(c) Safety Test.- Four healthy, 8 to 12 weeks old ducks weighting not less than 600 gms are inoculated subcutaneously with 1ml of 10-1 dilution of the vaccine and observed for a period of 14 days. During the period of observation, the ducks shall not show any untoward reaction.

(d) Sterility test.- Shall comply with the test for sterility described in the general monograph on ―Viral Vaccines‖.

(e) Potency Test.- Six susceptible ducks 8 to 12 weeks old each weighing not less than 600 gms are inoculated subcutaneously with 1 ml of 10-3 dilution of the vaccine.
The minimum virus contents in 1 ml. dose of the vaccine shall be 103.5 EID50. 14 days later these ducks are challenged subcutaneously each with 1 ml. of 10-2 dilution of the virulent duck plague virus (1000 DEID50) along with 2 unprotected young ducks of about 8-12 weeks age. The unprotected ducks shall show symptoms of duck plague and die within 10 days, while the protected ducks shall remain normal during the observation period of 14 days.

Labelling.- Should comply with the requirements of labelling as laid down in the general monograph on ―Viral Vaccine‖.

Storage.- Vaccine when stored at minus 15o C to minus 20o C may be expected to retain its potency for one year and about three months if stored in the freezing chamber of Refrigerator i.e. minus 5o C.

Avian Encephalomyelitis Vaccine (Living)

1. Synonyms.- Avin-encephalomyelitis Vaccine Freeze dried.

2. Definition.- A virus bearing tissue and fluid suspension from embryonated hen‘s legs.

Preparation.- The stock seed virus which has been established as pure, safe and immunogenic shall be used for preparing the vaccine.

(i) Each lot of stock seed virus shall be tested for pathogenicity by chicken embryo inoculation test:

(a) One dose of the seed lot shall be mixed with 9 volume of sterile heat inactivated specific, antiserum to neutralize vaccine virus in the product.

(b) After neutralization, 0.2 ml of serum vaccine mixture shall be inoculated into each of at least 20 fully susceptible chicken embryos (0.1ml of the inoculum shall be inoculated on CAM of 9-11 days old embryos and
0.1 ml in the allantoic sac).

(c) Eggs shall be candled for 7 days. Deaths occurring during first 24 hours shall be discarded but at least 18 viable embryos shall survive 24 hours post inoculation for a valid test. All embryos and CAMs from embryos which die after the first day shall be examined.

(d) If the death or abnormality attributable to inoculums occur, the seed lot is unsatisfactory.

(ii) Immunogenicity test.- Avian encephalomyelitis susceptible chicks, all of same age 8 weeks old) shall be used 20 chickens shall be inoculated with the field dose of the virus by prescribed route. Ten additional chickens of same age and flock shall be held as unvaccinated controls.

At least 21 days post vaccination, the controls and vaccinates shall be challenged intracerebrally with Virulent avian encephalomyelitis virus and observed each for 21 days. At least 80 percent of controls shall show signs of avian encephalomyelitis or die. At least 19 to 20 vaccinates shall remain free from clinical avian encephalomyelitis during the observation period for the stock seed virus to be satisfactory

4. Standards:-

(a) Description:- Greyish white flakes easily dispersible in the diluent.

(b) Identification:- At least 5–6 days old embryonated eggs (from hens with no history of infection with avian encephalomyelitis) shall be inoculated with 0.1 ml of undiluted vaccine into the yolk sac and kept in incubator and then transferred to the brooder where they are allowed to hatch. The hatched chicks shall be raised for 7 days. More than 5 per cent of hatched chicks shall manifest the typical symptoms (weak-leg, leg paralysis tremor etc.) at the end of this period.

(c) Moisture Content: - Shall not exceed 1.0 per cent.

(d) Sterility Test: - Shall comply with the test for sterility described under general monograph on ―Viral Vaccines‖.

(e) Safety Test: - At least 25 avian encephalomyelitis susceptible birds (6-10 weeks of age) shall be vaccinated with 10 field doses by the recommended route and observed each day for 21 days. If unfavourable reactions attributable to the vaccine occur during the observation period, the batch of vaccine is unsatisfactory.

(f) Potency Test: -

(i) The vaccine shall be titrated for virus content. To be eligible for release, the batch shall have a virus titre of at least 102.5 EID50 per dose.

(ii) At least 10 susceptible chickens shall be vaccinated with the field dose of the vaccine by prescribed route and 10 chickens from same batch and source shall be kept as unvaccinated controls.

At least 21 days post-vaccination, both the groups shall be challenged intracerebrally with Virulent avian encephalomyelitis virus and observed for 21 days. At least 8 out of 10 controls shall develop recognizable signs or lesions of avian encephalomyelitis and at least 8 out of 10 vaccines should remain normal

5. Labelling: Shall comply with the requirement of labelling as laid down in general monograph on ―Viral Vaccines‖.

Marek’s Disease Vaccine (Living)

1. Synonyms.- Herpes virus of Turkey Vaccine HVT vaccine (Living).

Definition:- Marek‘s disease vaccine is a suspension of cell free fluid containing live virus.

Preparation.- The stock seed virus which has been established as pure, safe and immunogenic in avian species shall be used for preparing the seed virus for vaccine production.
(i) Safety Test – The stock seed virus shall be non-pathogenic for chickens as determined by the following procedure:
The groups of at least 25 chickens each at one day of age shall be used. These chickens shall be of the same source and batch be susceptible to Marek‘s disease and be kept in isolated group.

Group 1: Each chicken shall be injected with 0.2 ml of 10 times as much viable virus as will be contained in one dose of vaccine by intramuscular route.

Group II : Shall serve as controls. At least 20 chickens in each group shall survive for four days postinjection. All chickens that die shall be necropsied and examined for lesions of Marek‘s disease and cause of death. The test shall be judged according to the following :
At 120 days o age, the remaining chicken in both the groups shall be weighted, killed and necropoised. If at least 15 chicken in each of these two groups have not survived the 120 days period if any of the chicken of Group-I have gross lesions of Marek‘s disease at necroposy or if the average body weight of the chickens in Group-I is significantly (statistically) different from the average of Group-II at the end of 120 days, the lot of stock seed virus is unsatisfactory.
(ii) (iii) Purity test – Shall conducted in chickens and no lesions other than those typical of Turkey Herpes virus shall be evidenced.

Immunologenicity test – Sixty susceptible day old chicks are used. Thirty of them inoculated with the seed virus in a dose corresponding to the field dose of the final vaccine and 14-21 days later challenged by intrabdominal route with virulent Marek‘s diseas virus, alongwith the other 30 non-vaccinated control chicks. At the end of the observation period when the chicks are 20 weeks old, the surviving chickens are examined for the presence of antibody against Marek‘s disease by serological tests and postmortem inspection for lesions of Marek‘s disease.

Any bird dead is thoroughly examined and the cause of death ascertained by necropsy/histopathological examination. All the surviving birds are killed and necropsied.
The protection index (P1) is determined by following procedure :

1. Percent MD = No. with MD lesions x 100 No. with MD lesions + No. of –ve Surviviours (effective No.)

2. P.I. = Percent MD in controls – Percent MD in vaccinated x 100 Percent MD controls

Master seed virus should have P.1 of at least 80 per cent.

Eighty per cent of the chicks in the control group must fall ill specifically. If more than 80 per cent of the vaccinated chickens do not show symptoms or signs of Marek‘s disease, the seed virus is regarded as sufficiently effective and can be used for production of vaccine.

The seed virus is propagated in duck embryo fibro-blast cell culture, chick embryo fibroblast or any other suitable cell culture (specific pathogen free SPF flock) and when the peak passage level is attained the cell monolayer is suspended in cold diluent of the following composition:

SPGA Stablizer

0.218% Sucrose.

0.0038% monosodium phosphate.

0.0072% dipotassium phosphate.

L Monosodium glutanate 0.0049 M.

1 per cent bovine albumin fraction (V).

0.25 per cent EDTA (Sterilised by Seitz filteration and stored at minus 10o C). The virus is freed from cell by ultrasonication for 3 minutes interrupted after every 30 seconds) at 100 MA and freeze dried at times 60o C preferably in shelf freeze dried in convenient volumes.
The doses per ampoule vial is calculated after titrating the freeze dried product in terms of plaque forming units (PFU) in the corresponding cell monolayers.

4. Standards:
(a) Description: - The cell free freeze dried HVT vaccine look uniformly grayish in colour and easily dispersible in the specified diluent.

(b) Identification. - The vaccine on inoculation in suitable cell culture system shall cause cytopathic effect typical of Herpes virus of Turkey. Specific antiserum of Herpes virus of Turkey shall neutralize the cytopathic effect.

(c) Moisture content. - Moisture content shall not exceed one per cent.

(d) Sterility test. - Shall comply with the test prescribed in general monograph on ―Viral Vaccines‖.

(e) Safety Test.- At least 25 one day old chickens shall be injected with ten times of the field dose of vaccine by intramuscular route. The chickens shall be observed each day for 21 days. Chickens dying during the period shall be examined, cause of death determined and the results recovered as follows :

(i) If at least 20 chickens do not survive the observation period, the test is inconclusive.

(ii) If lesions of any disease or cause of death are directly attributable to the vaccine the vaccine is unsatisfactory.

(f) Potency test. - The sample shall be titrated in the cell culture system. A satisfactory batch shall contain at least 1500 plaque forming units (PFU) as per dose at the time of release

and maintain at least 1000 PFU till the end of expiry period.

5. Labelling. - Shall comply with the requirements of labelling as laid down in general monograph on ―Viral Vaccines‖.

6. Storage and expiry date. - The freeze-dried cell free HVT vaccine may be stored at 4oC for 6 months.

Goat Pox Vaccine (Living Cell Culture)

1. Synonym. - Goat Pox Vaccine (living), Attenuated Goat Pox Vaccine.

Definition. - Goat Pox vaccine is freeze-dried preparation, prepared by growing attenuated goat pox virus in kid kidney/testicular cell culture.

3. Preparation. - Primary kidney/testicular cell cultures of disease free kid are used. The monolayers infected with the seed virus are incubated at 37o C. The cultures are harvested by three cycles of freezing and thawings 6 to 7 days post infection when more than 80 per cent cells show CPE. The suspension is centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 10 minutes to remove cellular debris being stored at minus 20o C. The suspension is freeze dried after addition of 5 per cent Lactalbumin hydrolysate and 10 per cent sucrose.

4. Standards:

(a) Description. - Light yellow colour.

(b) Identification - The product affords protection to goat against goat pox.
(c) Moisture content. - The moisture content shall not exceed 1.0 per cent.
(d) Safety tests.- (i) Laboratory animals. - Six mice, 3 guinea pigs and 3 rabbits are inoculated with
0.2ml intraperitoneally, 0.5 ml and 1.0 ml subcutaneously, respectively with 10 field doses of the vaccine. The inoculated animals during the observation period of 80 days shall remain normal.

(ii) Goat. - Two susceptible goats of 6 to 8 months of age are inoculated in postaxillary region by subcutaneous route with one-hundred field doses of the vaccine. The inoculated animals shall not develop more than a local reaction of 2 to 3 cms.
These animals shall be observed for 10 days.

(e) Sterility test.- Shall comply with the test for sterility described under the general monograph on ―Viral Vaccines‖.

(f) Titration in cell culture.- Four randomly selected samples are inoculated in kid kidney cell cultures using 5 tubes for each dilution. The titration shall be repeated thrice. One thousands TCID50 is used as a field dose.

(g) Potency Test.- The three susceptible goats (8-10 months) are inoculated with 1/10th field dose and 3 susceptible goats (8-10 months) with one field dose, subcutaneously. Three in contract controls are also kept with the inoculated goats. These animals are observed for a period of 14 days and their body temperature recorded daily. The vaccinated

animals shall not show any termal, local or generalized reaction. Twenty one days post infection, the vaccinated and controls and challenged with 10,000 TCID50 of virulent goat pox virus by intradermal route. The temperature of these goats are recorded for a period of 14 days. The vaccinated goats shall not develop localized or generalized reaction while control goats shall develop high fever, localized reaction or even generalized reaction in some cases.

Labelling .- Shall comply with requirements of labelling as laid down in the general monograph on ―Viral Vaccines‖.

Storage and expiry date.- The vaccine is expected to retain its potency for 12 months if stored at minus 15o C to minus 20o C and for three months at 2o C to 4o C.

Sheep Pox Vaccine (Inactivated)

1. Synonym .- Formal gel sheep pox vaccine.

2. Definition .- Sheep pox vaccine is a formaline inactivated gel treated tissue vaccine.

Preparation.- Healthy susceptible sheep of 8-12 months of age are inoculated subcutaneously with 500 ml of the 1:100 dilution of the Russian Virulent Sheep Pox Virus.
Seven to eight day post inoculation skin of the abdomen alongwith the oedema is collected.
The infected tissues are homogenized in 10 percent concentration in phosphate buffer (pH 7.4-7.6) which after the extraction of the virus is mixed with sterile gel and buffer in the following proportion :-

6 percent aluminium hydroxide gel-50 per cent.
Phosphate Buffer (pH 7.6)- 35 per cent.
10 per cent suspension – 15 per cent

This is later formalized and kept at 20-25oC/10oC for varying periods.

4. Standards.-

(a) Description .- It is a greyish white suspension. During storage the gel settles at the bottom, upper layer of the suspension is clear.

(b) Identification.- This product affords protection to sheep against sheep pox.

(c) Safety test.- This is carried out by inoculating 2 white mice with 0.2 ml., one guinea pig with 1.0 ml and one rabbit with 3,0 ml of vaccine. The animals should remain clinically healthy for 10 days.

(d) Sterility test.- This is done by seeding the vaccine on usual bacterial media. The plates and tubes are incubated for 10 days at 37o C. If the pathogenic bacteria are found, the vaccine is rejected while with non-pathogenic bacteria the vaccine is passed for field use.

(e) Potency test.- This is done by inoculating 4 non immune susceptible sheep preferably exotic breed of 1-2 years with 3 ml of vaccine in the thigh, subcutaneously.

The vaccinated sheep are challenged 15 days after inoculation alongwith 3 controls each with 0.1 ml of virulent virus containing 200 infective doses intradermally under the tail.

The sheep are observed for 10 days and their skin reaction recorded. The vaccine is considered potent if all the vaccinated, sheep do not show thermal or local skin reaction.
Vaccine is also potent if 3 vaccinated animals do not develop any reaction and one shows abortive skin reaction, while at least 2 of the 3 controls develop typical sheep pox reaction at the site of inoculation.

Labelling.- Shall comply with the requirements of labelling as laid down in the general monograph on ― Viral Vaccines‖.

6. Storage.- The vaccine shall be stored at 4o C to 5oC. it keeps well at above temperature upto 12 months.
Sheep Pox Vaccine (Living Cell Culture)

1. Synonym.- Sheep pox vaccine (Living), attenuated sheep pox vaccine.

Definition.- Sheep pox vaccine is freeze dried preparation prepared by growing attenuated sheep pox virus in lamb kidney/testicular cell cultures.

Preparation.- Primary cell cultures prepared from kidney/testicles of disease free lambs are used. The mono layers infected with the seed virus are incubated at 37o C. The cultures are harvested by 3 cycles of freezing and thawing 6 to 7 days post infection when more than 80 per cent Cells show C.P.E. The suspension is centrifuged at 1000 r.p.m. for 10 minutes to remove cellular debris before being stored at minus 20o C. The suspension is freeze dried after addition of 5 per cent Lactalbumin hydrolysate and 10 per cent sucrose.

4. Standards:-

(a) Description.- Light yellow colour.

(b) Identification.- The product affords protection to sheep against sheep pox.
(c) Moisture contents.- The moisture contents should not exceed 1.00 per cent.
(d) Safety tests.- (i) Six mice, 3 guinea pig and 3 rabbits are inoculated with 0.2 ml intraperitoneally
0.5ml and 1.0 ml subeutaneously, respectively containing 10 field doses of the vaccine. The inoculated animals during the observation period of 10 days should remain normal.

(ii) One hundred field doses of the vaccine are inoculated subcutaneously into each of 2 susceptibles sheep in postaxillary region. Inoculated animals shall not develop more than a local reaction of 2 to 3 cms.

(e) Sterility test. - Shall comply with the test for sterility as described under the general monograph on ―Viral Vaccines‖.

(f) Titration in cell culture. - Four randomly selected samples reconstituted in a maintenance medium are inoculated in lamb kidney cell cultures using 5 tubes for each dilution. The titrations shall be repeated thrice. The TCID50 to be calculated by Read and Muonch method. One thousand TCID50 is calculated as one field dose.

(g) Potency test. - Three susceptible sheep 8-10 months old are inoculated with 1/10th, field dose and 3 susceptible sheep with one field dose, subcutaneously. Three in contact controls are also kept with the inoculated sheep. These animals are observed for a period

of 14 days and their temperature is recorded daily. The vaccinated animals should not show any thermal, local or generalize reactions. Twenty-one days post infection the vaccinated and controls are challenged with 10,000 ID50 of virulent sheep poxvirus by intradermal route. The temperature of these sheep are recorded for a period of 14 days.
The vaccinated sheep should not develop localised or generalized reaction while control sheep should develop high fever, localized reaction or even generalized reaction in some cases.

Labelling.- Shall comply with requirements of labelling as laid down in the general monograph on ―Viral Vaccines‖.

Storage and expiry date.- The vaccine is expected to retain its potency for 12 months if stored at minus 15o C to minus 20o C and three months at 2 o C to 4 o C

Tissue Culture Rinderpest Vaccine

1. Synonyms.- Cell Culture Rinderpest Vaccine.

Definition.- Tissue Culture Rinderpest Vaccine is a freeze dried preparation of live modified rinderpest virus adapted to and propagated in cell culture.

Preparations.- Primary or secondary monolayer cultures of the kidney cells (Bovine or any other suitable animals) taken from kidney from healthy animals free from any pathological changes shall be used. When secondary cultures are used they shall have retained their original morphology and Karyotype. Kabete ̳O‘ stain of Rinderpest virus developed by East African veterinary Research Organisation (Plowrights strain between the passage levels of 99th and 100th passages) shall be used. The virus harvested from cell monolayer culture prepared from the kidneys of a single calf or serially cultivated bovine kidneys cells (Not more than 10 passages away from the Primary) inoculated with the same seed and harvested together, will be freeze dried with stabilizers in suitable quantities.

4. Standards.- It complies with the requirements of general standards of viral vaccines:

(a) Description.- Dry light yellow coloured flakes readily soluble in chilled and saline or buffered saline.

(b) Identifications.-

(i) Protects cattle against a subsequent challenge with virulent or caprinised rinderpest virus.

(ii) It is titrable in tissue culture systems capable of supporting the multiplication of this virus. The test shall be made on at least three separate occasions using a cell culture derived from different animals.

(iii) Specificity test shall be performed using an appropriate scrum neutralization test.

(c) Sterility test. - Each batch shall be tested for bacterial and mycotic sterility as given in general monograph on ―Viral Vaccines‖.

(d) Innocuity test.- Shall be made on each batch in at least two guinea pigs and six mice.
These animals shall be observed for at least two weeks for any untoward reaction.

(e) Safety and efficacy test.- The test for safety and efficacy shall be performed using the pooled reconstituted contents of not less than 4 ampoules taken at random. The vaccine

shall be injected subcutaneously into each of at least two susceptible cattle free from specific antibodies using the quantity containing not less than 100 fields doses and two further cattle and using 1/10th of the field dose (calculated on the basis of 1000 TCID50 one field dose). The animals shall be housed with at least two unvaccinated animals and observed for a period of three weeks. The vaccine passes the safety test if the cattle show no signs of unusual clinical reactions.

At the end of three weeks all the four animals will be challenged alongwith two in contact cattle with a challenge dose of not less than 104 ACID50 of virulent Rinderpest virus. The vaccine passes the potency/efficacy test if the in contact animals develop rinderpest and all the vaccinated animals remain normal.

5 Labelling.- Shall comply with general monograph on ―Viral Vaccines‖. Each ampoule or at least 50 percent ampoules in a lot shall contain at least following print :

(i) TCRP Volume.
(ii) Batch No. with year.
(iii) General instructions for use.

6 Storage .- The vaccine when stored at minus 20o C and plus 4 degree C will maintain its titre for 2 years and 6 months respectively.

Canine Distemper Vaccine

1. Synonyms.- Cannine Distemper Vaccine (Living)- Freeze-dried.

Definition.- It is freeze dried preparation of either tissues from chick embryo containing eggs adapted strain of cannine distemper virus or the cell culture in which modified virus has been cultivated.

Preparation.- Canine distemper vaccine shall be prepared from virus bearing cell culture, fluid or infected chroioalantoic membrane. Only stock seed virus which has been established as pure, safe and immunogenic shall be used for preparation of vaccine. Stock seed virus propagated in chicken embryo shall be tested for pathogen by chicken embryo test. One volume of the virus shall be mixed with 9 volume of specific sterile heat inactivated serum to neutralize the virus. Mixture shall be inoculated into twenty (9 to 11 days old ) chicken embryo (with 0.1 ml on CAM and 0.1 ml in alantoic sac).
Embryonated eggs shall be candled for 7 days daily. Death occurring in the first 24 hours shall be discarded. CAMS of embryos which die after 24 hours shall be examined. When necessary embryo sub-culture shall be made to determine the cause of death. The test should be concluded on the 7th day post inoculation.

The surviving embryos and their CAMS are examined. If deaths or abnormality due to the inoculums occur, the seed virus is unsatisfactory.

Immunogenicity test : Thirteen susceptible dogs 8-14 weeks old shall be used for the test (ten vaccinates and 3 controls). Blood samples are drawn from these animals and individual sample is tested for antibodies against canine distemper. Ten dogs shall be injected with a predetermined quantity of the virus and remaining 3 dogs are used as unvaccinated controls. The dose shall be based on the virus tiltration. At least 21 days post infection the vaccinated and controls shall be challenged intramuscularly with the same dose of virulent canine distemper virus and the animals are observed each day for 21 days.
At least 2 out of 3 controls should die and survivor should show the symptoms typical of canine distemper. At least 9 out of 10 vaccinated animals should survive and should not show any clinical signs of canine distemper during the observation period. The stock seed

virus should be tested for immunogenicity at least once in 5 years, if maintained under suitable conditions of storage. Eight days old chicken embryos from a healthy flock are inoculated on their chorioallantoic membrane with bacteriologically sterile virus suspension of egg adapted strain. After incubation for a period of five days, infected membrane and embryos are harvested. The individual embryo is tested for bacterial sterility. Those free from bacterial contamination are made into a 20 percent suspension in a suitable medium. The suspension is distributed in a single dose quantity into the ampoules of vials and freeze-dried.

The ampoules are sealed under vacuum or with pure dry sterile nitrogen before sealing.
Alternatively, the virus may be grown on the suitable cell culture. Cells along with the suspending fluid is harvested, distributed in single dose quantity in ampoules and freeze dried.

4. Standard.-

(a) Description. - It is a dry product, pinkish cream material, readily dispersible in water or a suitable solvent.

(b) Identification. - It infects CAM of fertile eggs. This is neutralized by canine distemper antiserum. It does not cause distemper after injection into susceptible ferrets or dogs but immunizes them against the disease.

(c) Moisture content. - Moisture content in the finished product shall not exceed more than 1.0 per cent.

(d) Sterility test. - Shall comply with the test for sterility as described in the general monograph on ―Viral Vaccines.‖

(e) Safety tests. - (i) Mice safety test: Reconstituted vaccine as recommended on the label shall be tested.

Eight mice, 4 weeks old shall be inoculated intracerebally with 0.03 ml and 8 mice shall be inoculated intraperitoneally with 0.5ml. Both groups shall be observed for 7 days, if unfavourable reaction attributable to the product in either 2 or more mice in either group is observed during observation period, the batch is unsatisfactory.

(ii) Dog Safety test.-Inject two healthy dogs eight to fourteen weeks old that have previously been shown to be free from distemper virus-neutralising antibodies by the recommended route with twice the dose stated on the label and observe for 21 days. No significant local or general reaction develops.

(i) Potency test. - (i) Titration : Final samples of finished product shall be tested for virus titre, and when tested at any time within the expiry period, it should contain not less than 103 ID50 per dose.

(ii) It shall be carried out in dogs. Two healthy susceptible dogs each of 8-14 weeks of age free from distemper neutralizing antibodies are injected subcutaneously each with one vaccination dose. Serum samples shall be collected from each dog 14 days after vaccination and these shall have specific neutralizing antibodies at a dilution of 1: 100.

6. Labelling.- Shall comply with the requirements of labelling as laid down in the general monograph on ―Viral Vaccines‖.

7. Storage and expiry date. - For the freeze-dried product the expiry date is one year when stored at minus 20oC.

Avian Infectious Bronchitis Vaccine (Living)

1. Synonyms. - Avian Infectious Bronchitis Vaccine (Living) freeze-dried.

Definition. - It is a freeze-dried product of low virulent Avian Infectious Bronchitis Virus grown in embryonated hen‘s eggs of cultivated in cell culture.

Preparation. - Only stock seed virus which has been established as pure, safe and immunogenic shall be used. Each jot of stock seed virus shall be tested for other pathogens by chicken embryo inoculation tests as follows: -

A lot of seed virus shall be mixed with 9 volumes of sterile heat inactivated specific anti- serum to neutralize and the vaccine virus serum mixture shall be inoculated into each of at least 20 fully susceptible chicken embryos of 9-11 days old (0.1 ml on CAM and 0.1 ml in the allantoic sac). Eggs are candled daily for 7 days. Deaths occurring during first 24 hours shall be discarded but at least 18 viable embryos shall survive 24 hours post inoculation for a valid test. All embryo and CAMS from embryos shall be examined which die after 24 hours. If necessary embryo subcultures shall be made to determine the cause of death. The test shall be concluded on the 7th day post inoculation and surviving embryos including the CAM shall be examined. If death and or abnormality attributable to the stock seed virus occur, the seed lot is unsatisfactory.

Each lot of stock seed virus shall be tested for immunogenicity as below: -

Bronchitis susceptible chickens of the same age and source shall be used. For each method of administration recommended on the label and for each serotype against which protection is claimed, 20 chicks shall be used as vaccinates. Ten additional chickens for each serotypes against which protection is claimed shall be held as unvaccinated controls.
21 to 28 days post vaccination all vaccinates and controls shall be challenged by eye drops with virulent Bronchitis virus. A separate set of vaccinates and controls shall be used for each serotype against which protection is claimed. The challenge virus shall have a titre of at least 104.6 EID50 per ml. Trachea swabs shall be taken once 5 days post challenge from each vaccinated and controls. Each swab shall be placed in test tube containing 3 ml of tryptose phosphate broth and antibiotics. The tubes and swabs shall be swirled thoroughly and stored at minus 40o C pending egg inoculation. For each chicken swabs at least 5 chicken embryos, 9-11 days old shall be inoculated in the allantoic cavity with 0.2 ml of broth from each tube. All the embryos surviving 3rd day post inoculation shall be used in evaluation. A tracheal swab shall be positive for virus recovery when any of the embryos show typical infections bronchitis virus lesions such as stunting, curling, kidney urates, clubbed down or death during 4-7 days post inoculation period.

90 percent of the controls should prove positive for virus recovery. If less than 90 per cent of the controls are negative for virus recovery, the stock seed is unsatisfactory. The stock seed virus should be tested for immunogenicity once in 5 years provided it is maintained under standard conditions of the bronchitis virus storage.

4. Standards. -

(a) Descriptio: It is greyish-white product easily dispersible in the diluent.

(b) Identification: (i) The contents of the ampoule are suspended as per the instructions for the field use. The 0.2ml of the suspension shall be inoculated in the allantoic cavity of 9-11 days old chicken embryo and are incubated for 7 days. The lesions typical of infectious bronchitis shall be observed in the embryos at the end of incubation period. The allantoic fluid shall not agglutinate the chicken RBC's.

(ii) Specific antisera against avian infectious bronchitis virus should neutralize the vaccine virus.

(c) Moisture content. - Moisture content in the finished product should not exceed 1.0 per cent.

(d) Sterility test. - Complies with the test for sterility as described under the general monograph on ―Viral Vaccines‖.

(e) Safety test. - Ten healthy susceptible chickens 5-10 days old from the same source batch shall be vaccinated with ten field dose of the vaccine and along with five chicks from same batch as unvaccinated controls by the prescribed route and observed 7 or 21 days post vaccination. Neither severe respiratory symptoms nor death shall occur to more than one experimental chicks, none of the unvaccinated control shall show any clinical symptoms.

(f) Potency test. - The minimum virus content of the freeze-dried product shall not be less than 103.5 EID50 per bird. The virus content of the vaccine shall be titrated as below:

Serial ten-fold dilution of the freeze-dried material will be made in tryptose phosphate broth. Three to five embryonated eggs (9-11 days old) shall be in inoculated with 0.1 ml of each dilution into the allantoic cavity and observed daily for 7 days.

Deaths occurring during the first 24 hours shall be discarded. The surviving embryos are examined for the evidence of infection and EID50 shall be calculated by the Reed and Muench Method/spearman and Karber method.

5. Labelling .- Shall comply with the requirement of labelling as laid down in the general monograph on ―Viral Vaccine‖.
6. Storage and expiry date.- Shall be stored at 4o C for six months].

PART II –ANTISERA

Provisions applicable to the production of all Sera from Living Animals

1. Definitions- (i) This Part of the Schedule applies to antibacterial sera, anti-viral sera and anti-toxic sera which are prepared by injecting bacteria or viruses or their products into buffalo- bulls or other suitable animals so as to produce active immunity which is manifested by the formation of anti-body.

(ii) For the purpose of this Part of the Schedule an anti-serum means sterile liquid anti- serum concentrated and unconcentrated, solutions of globulins or their derivatives or solid forms which can be reconstituted when necessary.

2. Staff of Establishment- The establishment shall be under the direction and control of a competent expert in bacteriology and serology with adequate training in immunology and standardisation of biological products and knowledge of animal management. He shall be assisted by a staff adequate for carrying out the tests required during the course of preparation of the sera and standardisation of the finished products.

3. Proper Name- The proper name of he antiserum shall be the recognised scientific name of the diseases or its causative organism or some generally recognised abbreviations thereof preceded by the prefix ̳anti‘, and followed by the word ̳serum; as for example, ̳Anti- Anthrax serum‘. The proper name of any antitoxin may be formed from the word ̳Anti-toxin‘ preceded by the name of the organism from which the toxin was prepared, and followed, if desired, by a term indicating the source or the strain of that organism provided where there is no special provision in the Schedule, the name as approved by the Licensing Authority may be adopted.

4. Records-

(1) The permanent records which the licensee is required to keep shall include the following particulars: -

(a) As to the culture- Evidence of the identity and specificity of the cultures.

(b) As to the procedure used in immunising the animals;

(i) The method of preparing the cultures or antigen used for immunisation.
(ii) The dosage and methods employed in administering the culture or antigen.
(iii) The period in the course of immunisation at which blood is withdrawn for the preparation of the serum.

(c) Any test which may have been applied to the serum to determine its content of specific antibodies or its specific therapeutic potency and purity.

(2) If the licensee desired to treat the performance of any tests recorded under subparagraph (i) (c) of this paragraph as determining the date of completion of manufacture for the purpose of rule 109 he shall submit full particulars of the proposed test to the Licensing Authority and obtain his approval.

5. Cultures- The cultures used in immunising the animals shall be at all times open to inspection, and specimens shall be furnished for examination at the request of the Licensing Authority.

6. Quantity -

(a) Any antiserum shall be issued for veterinary use in the form of either.

(i) Actual serum, i.e., the liquid product of decantation of the coagulated blood or plasma without any addition, other than antiseptic or subtraction, or

(ii) A solution of the purified serum proteins containing the specific antibodies.

(b) At the time of issue, the liquid shall be clear or show at the most a slight opalescence or precipitate. Preparations of the natural serum shall not contain more than 10 per cent of solid matter. A solution of serum protein shall not contain more than 20 per cent of solid matter.

1. Precautions to be observed in preparations-

(i) Laboratories where sera are exposed to the air in the course of the process of preparation must be separated by a sufficient distance from stables and animals houses to avoid the risk of aerial contamination with bacteria from animal excreta, and must be rendered fly proof to prevent such contamination by insects. Such laboratories must have impervious walls and floors and must be capable of being readily disinfected when necessary.

(ii) A special room with impervious walls must be provided for the collection of blood from the living animals.

(iii) An efficient system of manure removal must be used which will prevent its accumulation in the vicinity of any room where blood or serum is collected or handled.

(iv) An adequate number of sterilizers must be provided for the sterilization of all glassware or other apparatus with which the serum may come into contact in the course of its preparation.

(v) All processes to which the serum is subjected during and after the collection from the animals, must be designed to preserve its sterility, but in the case of a artificially concentrated sera, it shall suffice that the process of concentration is

conducted with scrupulous cleanliness and in such a manner as to avoid unnecessary dangerous contamination.

(vi) The laboratories in which the testing of sera for potency, sterility and freedom from abnormal toxicity are carried out must be adequate for the purpose. An adequate supply of animals for use in such tests and suitable housing for such animals must be provided.

(vii) Provision must be made for complying with any special conditions which may be laid down in the Schedule relating to the production and issue of the particular serum, in respect of which the licence is granted.

8. Unhealthy or Infected Animals- If an animal used in the production of sera is found to be suffering from an infection except one produced by living organisms against which it is being immunized, or shows signs of serious or persistent ill health not reasonably attributable to the process of immunisation, the licensee shall immediately report the matter to the Licensing Authority and shall, if the authority orders an inspection and the Inspectors so directs, cause such animals to be killed and a postmortem examination of it to be made, and take steps to prevent any serum obtained from the animal being sold or offered for sale until permission is given by the Licensing Authority. If the result of the postmortem is such as to bring under suspicion, the health of any of the other animals used for the production of sera, the Licensing Authority may prohibit the use of those animals for the production of sera or may take such other steps as may be necessary to prevent the issue of sera which may be dangerous to animal health.

Provided in the case of emergency, the person in charge of the establishment may order the destruction of an animal used in the production of sera and suspected of infection, and shall in that case given notice forthwith to the Licensing Authority and shall permit an Inspector to be present at the postmortem examination.

9. Conditions and Housing of animals:

(i) The animals used in the production of sera should be adequately housed under hygienic environments.

(ii) Only healthy animals free from disease should be used in the preparation of sera.
(iii) Every animal intended to be used as the source of serum must be subjected to a period of observation in quarantine for at least seven days before being admitted to the animal sheds in which the serum yielding animals are housed.

(iv) In case of horses and other equidae, every animal used as source of serum shall either be actively immunized against tetanus or shall be passively immunized against the disease by injection of tetanus antitoxin in such doses as to ensure the constant presence of that antitoxin in the blood during the whole period of the use of the animals as a source of serum.

Anti-Sera and their General Standard

Anti-sera contain the immune substances that have a specific prophylactic or therapeutic action when injected into animals exposed to or suffering from a disease due to a specific microorganism or its toxin. Anti-sera are classified into three groups.

(i) Antitoxic sera (Antitoxin) (ii) Antibacterial sera.
(iii) Antiviral sera.

Antisera are usually issued in an unconcentrated form for animal use but may be concentrated and also freeze dried. However, for the purpose of the Schedule the word ̳antisera‘ is also used for the unconcentrated liquid sera only. A suitable bacteriostatic agent in a concentration sufficient to prevent the growth of microorganisms is added to the liquid serum.

General Standard

1. Description- Liquid native or unconcentrated antisera are yellow or yellowish brown in colour. They are initially transparent but may become turbid with age. They are almost odourless except for the odour of any bacteriostatic agent that may have been added.

2. Identification- The test for identity is described in the individual monograph.

3. Acidity or Alkalinity- All native antisera have a pH of 7.0 to 8.5.

4. Abnormal Toxicity- All anti-sera shall comply with the following tests or freedom from abnormal toxicity.

(a) Two healthy mice each weighing not less than 18 g. are injected subcutaneously each with 0.5 ml. of the sample and observed for five days. None of the mice should show any abnormal reaction or die.

(b) Two healthy guinea pigs each weighing 300 g. to 450 g. are injected subcutaneously each with 5 ml. of the sample and observed for seven days. None of the guinea-pigs should show any abnormal reaction or die.

5. Sterility- All anti-sera shall comply with the tests for sterility described in rules 115 to 119.

6. Potency- The potency of each preparation, when the available methods permit, is determined by the appropriate biological assay, and it is described under the individual monograph.

7. Total Solids- Native antisera should not contain more than 10 per cent solid matter.

8 Labelling- Should comply with the provisions for ̳Labelling‘ as laid down for ̳Bacterial Vaccines.‘

9. Storage- Liquid preparations of antisera shall be stored, protected from light at temperature between 2 ̊C to 4 ̊C and shall not be frozen.

10 Date of Manufacture- The date of manufacture shall be unless otherwise specified in the individual monograph in this part is as defined in clause (b) of sub-rule (3) of rule 109.

11. Containers- All antisera are distributed in sterilised containers of a material which is inert towards the substance and which are sealed to exclude micro-organisms.

12. Expiry Date- The expiry date of potency of all sera shall not be more than twentyfour months after the date of a manufacture.

Anti-Anthrax Serum

1. Synonym- Bacillus Anthracis Anti-serum.

2. Definition- Anti-anthrax serum is the serum of animals that confers a specific protection against Baccillus anthracis.

3. Preparation- The antiserum may be prepared in buffalo bulls after repeated injections of cultures of B. anthracis of a virulent strain.

4. Standard- It complies with the requirements in the general provisions for antisera under Description, Acidity or Alkalinity, Abnormal Toxicity, Sterility, Solids, Labelling, Storage and Expiry date.

Identification – It protects animals against infection with B. Anthracis

Anti-Blackquarter Serum

1. Synonym- Blackleg Antiserum, Clostridium Chauvoei-Anti serum

2. Definition-Anti-Blackquarter serum is the serum of suitable animals containing the Substances that have a specific neutralising effect on Clostridium Chauvoei.

3. Preparation- It is prepared by injecting subcutaneously or intramuscularly increasing doses of formolised cultures of Cl. Chauvoei into buffalo bulls.

4. Standards- It complies with the requirements described in the general provisions for antisera under Description, Acidity or Alkalinity, Abnormal Toxicity, Sterility, Solids, Labelling, Storage and Expiry date.

Identification- It protects susceptible animals against infection with virulent strains of Cl. Chauvoei.

Anti-Fowl-Cholera Serum

1. Synonym- Pasteurella Septica Antiserum (Avian).

2. Definition- Fowl Cholera Antiserum is the serum of animals containing the substances that confer a specific protection to fowls against virulent strain of Pasteurella Septica (Avian).

3. Preparation- Antiserum is prepared from buffalo bulls after they have been subjected to an injection of killed cultures of virulent strain of Pasteurella Septica (Avian) followed by injections of living cultures of the same organism.

4. Standard- It complies with the requirements described in the general provision for anti-sera under Description, Acidity or Alkalinity, Abnormal Toxicity, Sterility, Solids, Labelling, Storage and Expiry date.

Identification- It protects susceptible fowls against infection with Pasteurella Septica (Avian) and its homologous strains.

Anti- Haemorrhagic Septicaemia Serum

1. Synonym- Pasteurella Septica Antiserum.

2. Definition- Anti-Haemorrhagic Septicaemia Serum is the serum of animals containing the substances that confer a specific protection to susceptible animals against virulent strains of Pasteurella Septica.

3. Preparation – The antiserum is prepared from buffalo bulls after they have been subjected to repeated injections of formolised cultures of standard strain Pasteurella Septica with adjuvants, followed by suitable doses of virulent culture of the organism.

4. Standard.-It complies with the requirements described in the general provisions for antisera under Description, Acidity or Alkalinity, Abnormal Toxicity, Sterility, Solids, Labelling, Storage and Expiry date.

Identification- It protects susceptible animals against infection with homologous strains of Pasteurella Septica.

Anti-Rinderpest Serum

1. Synonym- Cattle Plague Antiserum

2 Definition- Anti-Rinderpest Serum is the serum of buffalo bulls containing the substances that confer a specific immunity to susceptible animals against virulent strains of the virus of rinderpest

3. Preparation – The antiserum is prepared from buffalos who have reacted to a dose of virulent rinderpest virus, which is injected simultaneously with a predetermined quantity of anti rinderpest serum so as to control the severity of the reaction (serum-simultaneousmethod).

4 Standard- It complies with the requirements described in the general provisions for antisera under Description, Acidity or Alkalinity, Abnormal Toxicity, Solids, Labelling, Storage and Expiry date.

(i) Identification- It protects susceptible animals against rinderpest.

(ii) Potency-Five Buffalo-calves of about one year of age in good condition are used for the test. Three are injected subcutaneously with the anti-rinderpest serum under test at the rate of 10 ml. per 46 kg. body weight, subject to a minimum of 20 ml. per animal. These together with the two remaining, are simultaneously injected subcutaneously at a different site with 1 ml. of a 1: 100 dilution of spleen suspension of virulent bull-virus.

The animals should be observed for fourteen days during which time the serum treated animals should exhibit no symptoms of rinderpest other than rise in temperature and slight intestinal disturbances, while the controls develop more severe symptoms or die.

Salmonella Pullorum Anti Serum

1. Synonym- Salmonella Pullorum Anti Serum.

2. Definition- Salmonella Pullorum anti-serum is the sera from fowls and contains antibodies against Salmonella Pullorum. It is used for standardizing batches of Salmonella Pullorum antigens and also used as a control along with the sera suspected for pullorum disease.

3. Preparation- The serum is prepared after intravenous inoculation with smooth culture suspension of Salmonella Pulloram in healthy birds.

4. Standards- It complies with the requirements in the general provisions for antisera under Description, Acidity, Alkalinity, Sterility, Solids, Labelling, Storage and Expiry date.

5 . Identification- It should give positive agglutination with Salmonella pullorum antigen.

Standard Anti-Brucella Abortus Serum

1. Synonym- National counterpart of standard anti-Brucella Abortus serum.

2. Definition- Standard Anti-Brucella abortus serum is the serum which contains 1000 International Units (I.U) per ml. and is used for standardizing batches of brucella antigens and is also used as a control along with the sera suspected for brucellosis.

3. Preparation- The serum is prepared after intravenous inoculation of suspension of smooth culture of B. abortus (strain 99) in rabbits or cattle and subsequently diluting it suitably with brucella-free healthy serum so that when tested with standardized Brucella abortus tube test antigen, it gives 50% agglutination at 1/500 final serum dilution.

4. Standard- It complies with the requirements in the general provision for antisera under Description, Acidity, Alkalinity, Sterility, Solids, Labelling, Storage and Expiry date.

Identification- It should give agglutination with Brucella antigen.

PART III- DIAGNOSTIC ANTIGENS

Provisions Applicable to the Manufacture and Standardisation of Diagnostic Agents (Bacterial Origin)

1 Definition- This Part of the Schedule applies to reagents of bacterial origin employed for various tests.

2 Staff of establishment- A competent expert in bacteriology with sufficient experience in the manufacture and standardisation of veterinary biological products shall be in charge of the establishment responsible for the production of various diagnostic agents of bacterial origin and he may be assisted by a staff adequate or carrying out the tests required during the preparation and standardisation of various diagnostic agents.

3 Proper Name- The proper name of any diagnostic agent is the name of microoraganism from which it is made, followed by the word ̳antigen‘ unless the Schedule

otherwise provides, or, it may be derived from the name of the organism responsible for the causation of the disease or if there is no special provision in the Schedule, the name approved by the Licensing Authority. In the case of the undermentioned preparations the proper name of the diagnostic agent may be as follows:

1. Abortus Bang Ring (A.B.R. ) Antigen.

2. Brucella Abortus Coloured Antigen.

3. Brucella Abortus Plain Antigen.

4. Johnin.

5. Mallein.

6. Salmonella Abortus Equi ―H‖ Antigen.

7. Salmonella Pullorum Coloured Antigen.

8. Salmonella Pullorum Plain Antigen.

9. Tuberculin.

4. Records- Cultures used in the preparation of diagnostic agents of bacterial origin must, before being manipulated into an agent be thoroughly tested for identity by the generally accepted tests applicable to the particular micro-organism. The permanent record which the licensee is required to keep shall amongst other include a record of the origin, properties and characteristics of the cultures.

5. Preparation- Diagnostic agents of bacterial origin are prepared from selected cultures after their careful examination for the identity, specificity, purity and antigenicity.
They may be prepared in the following manner:

(a) Formolised Antigens- The selected pure culture strain grown in a suitable medium at an optimum temperature for an appropriate period. The pure growth is then exposed to the action of a solution of Formaldehyde I.P. in a suitable concentration and at an appropriate temperature for a suitable period.

(b) In some cases, the diagnostic agents are prepared by growing the organisms on suitable media and then deriving specific protein constituents of the bacteria by various methods.

6. General Standard:-

(a) Description- Diagnostic agents may be clear opalescent or coloured liquids.

(b) Identification- Some exhibit specific agglutination when mixed with the serum of the animals infected with homologous organisms and others when injected into the animal body in appropriate doses cause specific reactions like hypersensitiveness, local and general reaction, if the animal is infected with homologous organisms.

(c) Sterility Test- All antigens shall be tested for sterility in accordance with rules 114 to 119.

(d) Standardisation- It is carried out either by determining the definite concentration in the product or by observing the general and local reactions in healthy and artificially infected animals with various standard dilutions of the product.

7. Labelling- As under general provisions for the bacterial vaccines with the addition that it is meant for diagnostic purposes only.

8. Storage- All antigens are stored, protected from light at a temperature between 2 ̊ C to 4 ̊ C.

9. Date of manufacture- The date of manufacture shall be unless otherwise specified in the individual monograph in this part as defined in clause (b) of sub- rule (3) of rule 109.

Abortus Bang Ring (A.B.R.) Antigen

1. Synonym- Milk Ring Test Antigen.

2. Definition- The antigen is a suspension of pure growth culture of standard strain of Brucella abortus strain 99 strained supravitally with 2,3,5, triphenyl tetrazolium chloride suspended in 0.85 per cent saline containing 1 per cent glycerol and 1 per cent phenol.

3. Preparation- Smooth strain of Brucella abortus strain 99 is grown in potato infusion agar for 48 to 72 hours in Roux flasks, at 37 ̊ C. Condensation fluid if any is pipetted off before washing. Each flask is washed with about 20 ml. of normal saline. The pooled washing is filtered through a gauze and the filtrate is collected in a measuring cylinder. To every 500 ml. of the filtrate 1 g. of 2, 3, 5, triphenyl tetrazolium chloride is added immediately. The container is shaken for thirty minutes till the tetrazolium salt is dissolved.
The product is taken out and kept at 37 ̊ C for two hours. After incubation the product is heated at 65 ̊ C in a water bath for thirty minutes. It is cooled and centrifuged at 3000 r.p.m for one hour. The supernatant is pipetted off and sediment is suspended in normal saline containing 1 per cent glycerol and 1 per cent phenol and filtered through sterile cotton wool.
This forms concentrated antigens.
Standardization of the Strained Antigen

An aliquot portion of the microbial suspension stained with phenylte-trazolium is taken, representing the initial undiluted suspension. 1 ml. per tube of this initial undiluted stained suspension is added to six test tubes, followed by increasing quantities of the glycerolphenol diluent as follows:-

Tube Undiluted Stained Suspension Diluent

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

1.4

1.6

The contents of each tube are then diluted tenfold with the same diluent and serve as antigen for a tube agglutination test with the Standard Serum (or its national counterpart). In this way, six sero-reactions will be carried out. During this procedure, the concentrated strained microbial suspension should be kept in the refrigerator at 4 ̊ C.
The agglutination reactions are read after forty-eight hours at the agglutination titre of the Standard Serum, previously determined with the usual unstained antigen in the tube test, corresponding to the correct dilution of the standard antigen.
The next step, therefore, is to dilute the concentrated stained suspension to the same extent as the tube whose tenfold dilution has given the correct agglutination titre, i.e. the concentration of antigen in the tube before the tenfold dilution had been made.

4. Standard:

(a) Description- It is a red colour liquid containing dead bacteria in suspension.

(b) Identification- It shows formation of a specific cherry red coloured ring in the cream layer when mixed with pooled samples of milk taken from animals suffering from burcellosis.

(c) Sterility Test- Should comply with tests for sterility described in the general monograph on ̳Diagnostic Antigen‘. The test shall, however, be done before colouring.

5. Labelling and Storage- Should comply with the requirements of ̳Labelling‘ and ̳Storage‘ as laid down in the general monograph on ̳Diagnostic Antigens‘.

6. Expiry Date- The date of expiry of potency shall be not more than nine months from the date of manufacture when stored 2 ° C to 4° C.

Brucella Abortus Coloured Antigen

1. Synonym- Brucella abortus Cotton Strain 99 coloured Antigen.

2. Definition- Brucella Abortus colured Antigen, is a suspension of pure smooth cultures of Brucella abortus strain 99 in phenolised glycerine saline, the bacteria being coloured by the addition of crystal violet and brilliant green. This antigen is used for plate test for serological diagnosis of brucella infection.

3. Preparation- Seventy-two hours old growth of Brucella Abortus strain ninety-nine in smooth form on potato infusion agar medium in Roux flasks is washed with phenolised glycerine saline (containing 12 per cent sodium chloride, 20 per cent glycerine and 0.5 per cent phenol). The washed growth is filtered through a pad of absorbent cotton wool and the suspension is coloured by the addition of 1 ml. each of 1 per cent aqueous solution of crystal violet and brilliant green for very 250 ml. of the suspension. The product is heated for sixty minutes in a water bath at 60° C before it is standardised.

4. Standard:

(a) Description- It is a greenish violet liquid containing dead bacteria in suspension.

(b) Identification-It gives specific agglutination when mixed with the serum of the animal infected with brucella organism.

(c) Sterility Test- Should comply with the tests for sterility described in the general monograph on ̳Diagnostic Antigens‘

(d) Standardisation- 0.5 ml. of the antigen is mixed with 4.5 ml of normal saline solution in Hopkins graduated tube. The mixture is centrifuged at 3000 r.p.m. for sixty minutes and the percentage of bacterial cells present in the original antigen is assessed by noting the height of the cell deposit. The antigen is then standardised so as to contain 10 per cent cell deposit.

5. Labelling and Storage- Should comply with the requirements of ̳Labelling‘ and ̳Storage‘ as laid down in the general monograph on ̳Diagnostic Antigens‘.

6. Expiry Date- The date of expiry of potency shall be not more than nine months from the date of manufacture when stored at 2 ° C to 4°C.

Brucella Abortus Plain Antigen

1. Synonym- Brucella Abortus Strain 99 Plain Antigen.

2. Definition- Brucella Abortus Plain Antigen is a suspension of a pure smooth culture of Brucella abortus strain 99 in phenol-saline.

3. Preparation- Seventy-two hours old growth of Br. Abortus strain 99 in smooth form on potato infusion agar medium in Roux flasks is washed with normal saline solution.
The washed growth is filtered through a pad of absorbent cotton wool and the suspension is

kept at 60 ° C per cent. for sixty minutes on a water bath to kill the organisms. It is then preserved by the addition of phenol in a final concentration of 0.5 per cent.

4. Standard:

(a) Description- An opalescent liquid containing dead bacteria in suspension.
(b) Identification –It gives specific agglutination when mixed with the serum of animals infected with brucella organism.
(c) Sterility Test- Should comply with the tests for sterility described in the general monograph in ̳Diagnostic Antigen‘.

(d) Standardisation- Mix the concentrated antigen well and dilute 1 ml. with
0.5 per cent phenol saline until it corresponds to about Tube 4 of Brown‘s opacity tubes. Further dilutions of the antigen adjusted to opacity tube No. 4 are made.
The particular dilution that gives 50 per cent agglutination with anti-brucella abortus serum ( containing 1000 International Units) at 1 : 500 final serum dilution, is assessed as the diluting factor for the concentrated antigen. The bulk of the concentrated antigens is accordingly diluted for issue as standard antigen.
5. Labelling and Storage- Should comply with the requirements of ̳Labelling and Storage‘ as laid down in the general monograph on ̳Diagnostic Antigen‘.

6. Expiry Date- The date of expiry of potency shall be not more than nine months from the date of manufacture when stored at 2° C to 4° C.

Johnin

1. Definition- Johnin is a preparation of a fluid medium in which Mycobacterium Paratuberculosis has been grown in artificial culture and which has been freed by filtration from the bacilli.

2. Preparation- Young culture of selected strain of Myco-Paratuberculosis of bovine origin is grown on synthetic medium and incubated at 37 ° C for ten to twelve weeks. Flasks showing lucurient and pure growth are steamed for three hours thereafter kept at room temperature overnight. The contents are filtered through fine meshed sieve.
The filtrate is concentrated over a steam bath to one-tenth of its original volume and kept in cold storage for fourteen days before being filtered through Seitz filter. The product is dispensed in ampoules and hermetically sealed.

3. Standards:-

(a) Description- A yellowish brown to brownish liquid.

(b) Identification- It produces hot, painful and oeodemateus swelling at the site of inoculation in animals infected with Myco-paratuberculosis organism.

(c) Sterility Test- Should comply with the test for sterility described in the general monograph on ̳Diagnostic Antigens‘.

(d) Potency Test- Two animals, previously infected with Myco-paratuberculosis and two healthy animals are each injected intrademally in the neck region with 0.1 ml. of the product. Forty-eight hours later, the injection is repeated at the same site.
The product should produce a typical reaction in the infected animals in the form of a hot painful and oedemetous swelling at the site of inoculation persisting for at least forty-eight hours after the second injection. Control animals should not show such reaction.

4. Labelling and Storage- Should comply with the requirements of ̳Labelling‘ and ̳Storage‘ as laid down in general monograph on ̳Diagnostic Antigens‘.

5. Expiry Date- The date of expiry of potency shall be not more than two years from the date of manufacture when stored at 2 ̊ C to 4 ̊ C.

Malleins

1. Definition- (i) Malleins are preparations of fluids media in which the Actinobacillus mellei has been grown in artificial culture and which have been freed by filtration from the bacilli.

(ii) For the purposes of this Schedule malleins are classified into (a) Malleinsubcutaneous and (b) Mallein intradermo-palpebral (I.D.P.)

2. Preparation:-

(a) Mallein Subcutaneous- Three to four weeks old pure growth of standard strain of A. mallei grown on synthetic medium is steamed for one hour in Koch‘s steam sterilizer. One part of 5 per cent phenol solution is added to every nine part of the dead culture which is then filtered through Seitz filter.

(b) Mallein Concentrated. - The procedure is the same as for Mallein Subcutaneous except, that the filtrate is evaporated in porcelain dish over steam to half the original volume before addition of phenol. Five per cent phenol solution is added in sufficient quantity to the concentrated product, to give a final concentrated of 0.5 per cent.

3. Standards:

(a) Description- A yellowish to brown viscous liquid.

(b) Identification- It produces hot tense, painful swelling when injected into the animals infected with A. mallei organisms.

(c) Sterility Test- Should comply with the tests for sterility described in the general monograph on ̳Diagnostic Antigens‘.

(d) Potency Test: -

(i) Mallein subcutaneous- Two ponies, previously sensitised with A.
Mallei and controls, are injected each with 1 ml. of the product subcutaneously in the neck region. The animals are observed for local reaction and rise in temperature.
Local reaction is manifested by a hot tense, painful swelling becoming prominent within twenty-four hours. The rise in temperature is observed by recording the body temperature at the time of inoculation and subsequently at short intervals. A rise in temperature of 1 ̊ C or more above normal is indicative of infection.

(ii) Mallein Intra-dermo-Palpebral (I.D.P.)- Two ponies, previously sensitized with A. mallei and two healthy ponies are injected intradermally with 0.2 ml. of the product near the rim of the lower eye lid of one eye. Typical reactions such as painful swelling of the palpebral tissue with mucopurulent discharge from the eye is indicative of infection. The two healthy ponies should not show such reactions.

Similar test in other eye is performed with a previously determined patient mallein using as a standard. When the local reactions produced by intradermo palpebral infections of the two preparations are comparable the batch is passed for issue.

4. Labelling and Storage- Should comply with the requirement of ̳Labelling‘ and ̳Storage‘ as laid down in the general monograph on ̳Diagnostic Antigen‘.

5. Expiry Date- The date of expiry of potency shall be not more than two years from the date of manufacture when stored at 2 ̊ C to 4 ̊ C.

Salmonella Abortus Equi ‘H’ Antigen

1. Synonym- Equine Abortion Diagnostic Antigen.

2. Definition- Salmonella Abortus Equi Antigen is suspension of a pure smooth culture of actively motile Salmonella Abortus equi in formal saline.

3. Preparation- Standard strain of S.abortus equi is grown on nutrient agar in Roux flasks at 37 ̊ C for twenty-four hours. The pure growth in Roux flasks is washed with normal saline and diluted to contain approximately 800 million organisms per ml. Solution of Formaldehyde I.P. is added to give a final concentration 0.5 per cent and the formolised product is incubated at 37 ̊ C for twenty-four hours. The final product is dispensed in suitable containers.

4. Standards:- (a) Description- A slightly opalescent liquid containing dead bacteria in suspension.
(b) Identification- It gives specific agglutination when mixed with the serum of the animals infected with S.abortus equi organisms.
(c) Sterility Test- Should comply with the test for sterility described in the general monograph on ̳Diagnostics Antigens‘.

5. Labelling and storage- Should comply with the requirements of ̳Labelling‘ and ̳Storage‘ as laid down in the general monograph on ̳Diagnostic Antigens‘.

Expiry Date- The date of expiry of potency shall be not more than nine months from the date of manufacture when stored at 2 ̊ C to 4 ̊ C.

Salmonella Pullorum Coloured Antigen

1. Synonym- Bacillary White Diarrhoes (B.W.D) Antigen.

2. Definition- The antigen is a suspension in a solution containing 1 per cent Formaline, 1 per cent KH2PO4 and 0.85 per cent Sodium Chloride of pure smooth culture of standard strain of Salmonella Pullorum.

3 Preparation- Standard strain of S. Pullorum is grown on sulphur agar medium in Roux flasks for five days at 37 ̊ C. The pure growth is washed with 1.0 per cent Formal Saline.

Standardisation

The antigenic cell suspension is then centrifuged (preferably in cold centrifuge) for half an hour at 4000 rotations per minute and the packed cell volume determined. The packed cell is then re-suspended in a solution containing 1 per cent formalin, 1 per cent KH2 PO4 and 0.85 per cent sodium chloride, 1 ml. of packed cell is suspended in 10 ml. of the resuspendiary solution, mixed thoroughly and is passed through a cotton wool pad. The turbidity of the antigenic suspension is usually between 100 to 125 times Mac Farland scale standard and optimum 3 cc. of a 1 per cent aqueous solution of crystal violet are added to 100 ml. of the antigenic suspension. After making the dye the antigen is allowed to stand forty-eight hours before use. The average yield per Roux flasks of culture medium is about 50 ml. The antigen should be bottled in 10 ml. or 20 ml. quantity in amber-coloured bottles and corked with rubber caps and paraffin sealed and preserved until required for use within the expiry period. This antigen reacts instantly with the blood of all carrier birds and remains permanently negative with that of non-infected birds.

This antigen gives good reactions with positive sera whose titre is even as low as 1 : 20.

4. Standard:-

(a) Description- Violet coloured liquid containing dead bacteria in suspension.

(b) Identification- It gives specific agglutination when mixed with the serum of birds in infected with S. Pullorum infection. It is used for carrying out plate agglutination tests for serological diagnosis for S. Pullorum infection in birds.

(c) Sterility Test- Should comply with the test for sterility described in the general monograph on ̳ Diagnostic Antigen‘. The tests shall be done before addition of ̳Crystal Violet‘.

5. Labelling and Storage- Should comply with the requirements of ̳Labelling‘ and ̳Storage‘ as laid down in the general monograph 0n ̳Diagnostic Antigens‘.

6. Expiry Date- A six month expiration date for this antigen is recommended.
However, it is advisable to use fresh ones as far as possible. This antigen should be preserved at 4 ̊ C to 6 ̊ C in dark place in the refrigerator and should not be exposed to hot weather condition for longer than necessary before use in the field.

Salmonella Pullorum Plain Antigen

1. Synonym- Bacillary White Diarrhoes (B.W.D) Plain Antigen.
2. Definition- The antigen is a suspension of pure smooth culture of Salmonella pullorum in phenol saline.

3. Preparation- Forty-eight hours old pure culture of smooth strain of S. Pullorum is washed with 0.5 percent phenol saline and the pooled suspension is adjusted to contain approximately 800 million organisms per ml. by the addition of more carbol saline. The suspension is kept at room temperature of twenty-four hours, and dispensed in suitable containers.

4. Standard: -

(a) Description- An opalescent liquid containing dead bacteria in suspension.

(b) Identification- It gives specific agglutination when mixed with the serum of birds infected with S. Pullorum.

(c) Sterility Test- Should comply with the tests for sterility described in the general monograph on ̳Diagnostic Antigen‘.

5. Labelling and Storage- Should comply with the requirments of ̳Labelling‘ and ̳Storage‘ as laid down in the general monograph on ̳Diagnostic Antigens‘.

6. Expiry Date- The date of expiry of potency shall be not more than nine months from the date of manufacture when stored at 2 ̊ C to 4 ̊ C.

Tuberculin

1. Definitions:

(i) Tuberculins are preparations of fluid media on which Mycobacterium tuberculosis has been grown in artificial culture and which has been freed by filtration from the bacilli.

(ii) For the purposes of the Schedule tuberculins are classified in (a) TuberculinSubcutaneous (b) Heat Concentrated Synthetic Medium (H.C.S.M) Tuberculin (c) Avian tuberculin.

2. Preparation:-

(a) Tuberculin subcutaneous- Flasks containing Henley and Dorset synthetic medium are inoculated with standard human strains of Myco-Tuberculosis previously grown on glycerol- beef broth medium for ten days. After ten to twelve weeks of incubation at 37 ̊ C, flasks containing pure growth are steamed for three hours. The contents are filtered through fine meshed sieve and the volume is made up to its original with phenolised distilled water such that the final concentration of phenol is
0.5 per cent. It is then filtered through Seitz filter.

(b) Heat Concentrated Sythetic Medium (H.C.S.M) Tuberculin- To the strained liquid obtained after sieving as in the method of preparation of Tuberculin subcutaneous, glycerol is added in the proportion of 122 ml. per litre of the original volume of medium used. The mixture is evaporated to one-fifth of the original volume on a steam bath. An equal volume of 1 per cent phenol in distilled water is added after the mixture is cooled. The product is stored at 47 ̊ C for fourteen days before it is filtered through Seitz filter. It is then dispensed in ampoules.

(c) Avian Tuberculin Concentrated- The procedure is the same as for Tuberculin Concentrated (H.C.S.M) except that standard strain of Myco-tuberculosis (Avian) is used in its preparation.

3. Standard:-

(a) Description- A yellowish brown viscous liquid.

(b) Identification- When injected intradermally into the animal infected with tuberculosis diffused swelling occurs depending upon the allergic status of the animal, the magnitude of dose and specificity of the product. In non-infected animals this reaction is not observed.

(c) Sterility Test- Should comply with the test for sterility described in the general monograph on ̳Diagnostic Antigens‘.

(d) Potency Test- (i) Tuberculin subcutaneous-Six large white guinea-pigs each weighing not less than 300-450 g. are individually inoculated intramuscularly with 0.5 mg. (Moist growth from solid plants) of Mycobacterium tuberculosis three weeks prior to test of each batch of tuberculin; the following dilutions of (a) test tuberculin and (b) standard tuberculin are used:-

1 in 200, 1 in 400, 1 in 800 and 1 in 1600.
The six sensitized guinea pigs are depilated on one flank and after about twentyfour hours each animal inoculated intradermally with 0.2 ml. of each dilution of the two tuberculins in two rows. The reactions are read after twenty-four and forty-eight hours.
When the local reactions produced by the graded inter-dermal injections of the two preparations are comparable the brew is passed for issue.

(ii) Heat Concentrated Synthetic Medium (H.C.S.M) Tuberculin-Six adult white guinea-pigs each weighing not less than 300-450 g. and sensitized three weeks previously with 0.5 mg. (moist growth from solid plants) of Myco-Tuberculosis bovine type, injected intramuscularly are used for test of each batch. The following dilutions of (a) test tuberculin and (b) standard tuberculin are used: -

1 in 500, 1 in 1000, 1 in 2000 and 1 in 4000.

The six sensitized guinea pigs are depilated on one flank and after about twentyfour hours each animal is inoculated intradermally with 0.2 ml. of each dilution of the two tuberculins in two rows. The reactions are read after twenty-four and forty-eight hours. When the local reactions produced by the graded inter-dermal injections of the two preparations are comparable, the test tuberculin is passed for issue. The tuberculin is dispensed in ampoules.

(iii) Avian Tuberculin- Six adults fowls, with well developed wattles, sensitized at least three weeks previously by intramuscular injection with 10 mg. moist weight (from solid plants) of twenty-one days old culture of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Avian Type) are used for potency test of each batch. In each fowl, one wattle is inoculated with
0.2 ml. of undiluted test tuberculin and the other wattle with similar quantity of undiluted standard tuberculin. The reactions in each fowl are read after twenty-four hours and forty-eight hours and if comparable the product is passed for issue.

4. Labelling and Storage- Should comply with the requirments of ̳Labelling‘ and ̳Storage‘ as laid down in the general monograph on ̳Diagnostic Antigens‘.

5. Expiry Date- The date of expiry of potency shall be not more two years months from the date of manufacture when stored at 2 ̊ C to 4 ̊ C.

PART IV
GENERAL
1. For the purpose of this Schedule any test or method of testing described in the 1[British Pharmacopoeia (Veterinary)] shall be deemed to be a method approved by the Licensing Authority.

The Licensing Authority shall publish in the official Gazette from time to time particulars of any test or method of testing approved by him.]

Synonyms:
1[SCHEDULE F (II)

(See Rule 124-C)

STANDARDS FOR SURGICAL DRESSINGS

Bandage Cloth, Bleached Bandage Cloth, Rolled Bandage, Open Wove Bandage, Cotton Bandage Cloth.

Bandage Cloth consists of cotton cloth of plain weave made from machine spun yarn of suitable count to comply with a bleached count between 20 tex and 25 tex for warp and between 25 tex and 30 tex for weft. The fabric contains no filling, sizing or dressing material.
It may be supplied uncut and folded or cut to suitable size and rolled.

Description for uncut bandages:

Uncut bandages are cotton cloth of plain weave, in one continuous length showing no joints or seams, with well-formed selvedges. The cloth is bleached to a good white, is clean and odourless and reasonably free from weaving defects and from seed and leaf debris.

Description for cut bandage:

Same as for uncut bandages, except for selvedges which shall not be included in cut bandages. In addition, both the extremes and edges of cut bandages shall be straight and evenly cut, with reasonable freedom and loose threads.

Threads per dm: – Warp not less than 150 and weft not less than 85.

Weight in g/m2: - 57 ± 5.

Length and Width: - The length and width shall not be less than 99 per cent each of the length and width stated on the label. For cut bandages, each of the bandages in a packing complies with this requirement.

Foreign matter: - Not more than 2 per cent.

Fluorescence:

When viewed under screened ultra-violet light, not more than occasional points of fluorescence are observed.

Packing, Labelling and Storage:

Bandage Cloth shall be packed securely so as to allow normal handling and transport without tearing and exposing the contents. In packages of cut and rolled bandages, each bandage shall also individually be wrapped in a suitable paper. The net content is stated on the label in terms of length and width. Bandage Cloth must be stored in packed condition protected from dust. The packings of Bandage Cloth shall be labelled prominently with the words ―Non-Sterile‖.

Absorbent Gauze.

Synonyms.- Gauze; Unmedicated Gauze; absorbent Cotton Gauze.

Absorbent Gauze is cotton fabric of plain weave, supplied in various widths and lengths. The Gauze is bleached and free from any sizing, dressing or filling material. The yarn used is machine spun cotton yarn, of suitable count to comply with a bleached count between 17 and 25 tex in the finished fabric.

1. Ins. by G.S.R. No.318(E), dt.. 1-5-1985.

Description:

Cotton cloth, plain weave, with a simple selvedge present on both sides to prevent unravelling of yarn. The cloth is bleached to a good white, is clean, odourless, reasonably free from fabric defects and adhering sand debris from cotton seeds and leaves, or any other foreign matter.

Threads per dm:.- Warp not less than 75 and weft not less than 55.

Weight in g/m2: - 30 ± 5.

Length and widt:- Not less than 98 per cent each of the length and width stated on the label.

Absorbency:- Average sinking time not more than 10 seconds.

Fluorescence:- When viewed under screened ultra-violet light not more than occasional points of fluorescence are observed.

Foreign matter:- Not more than 1 per cent.

Sterility:- If sterile, the contents comply with the test for sterility.

Packing, Labelling and Storage:

Absorbent Gauze is folded and packed with such materials and so securely as to protect its absorbency and allow normal handling and transport without tearing and exposing the contents. The net content is stated on the label in terms of length and width. The packages shall be labelled prominently with the words ―Non-Sterile‖. If sterile, it shall be so stated on the label, and the packing method and material shall be such as to maintain the sterility. The Absorbent Gauze must also comply with the Sterility Test. Absorbent Gauze must be stored in packed conditions protected from moisture and dust.

Defect in fabric:.
METHODS OF TEST

The sample is unfolded, opened and held against diffused daylight or spread on black topped table to locate and identify prominently visible defects in yarn and fabric construction.
The fabric shall be reasonably free from holes, slubs, snarls and naps as well as the following:
-

Odour.- Misty odour, or any objectionable smell like that of chemicals or materials used in sizing and bleaching.

Skewness.- (For Bandage Cloth only) A condition where warp and weft do not keep at right angles to each other.

Defective Selvedge. - The selvedge tearing and allowing yarn to unravel and loop formation at selvedge.

Cracks.- Prominent steaks of space or gaps between warp or weft yarns.

Double ends.- More warp threads woven as one, due to wrong draw.

Sloughing.- Entanglement in the fabric of a bulk of yarn that has slipped off the weft yarn due to loose widing.

Measurement of length and width.

Length is the distance from end to end, along one edge of the fabric, and width is the perpendicular distance from one edge to the opposite edge.

Length. - Fix a meter scale to a table or mark off the division of one metre on a table edge. Starting from one end, spread the fabric flat on that table in a single layer keeping one

selvedge parallel to the scale; smoothen the fabric without stretching it, to avoid creases, and mark off with a coloured pencil, on the selvedge exactly one metre. Shift the fabric and measure the same way the second metre and so on for the entire length of the fabric making a mark at each metre. Note down the total length in metres. Repeat this at the opposite selvedge, as well as on the fabric folded approximately about the middle. The average of the three readings is the length. For cut bandages, one measurement at the middle of the bandages by folding it length-wise will suffice.

Width. - Lay the portion of the fabric to be measured flat and smooth on the tables, but do not stretch fabric except sufficiently to render it creaseless. At the place where mark had been made on the selvedge in measuring the length measure the perpendicular distance to the opposite selvedge with a metre scale. Note the width, repeat this at every mark made in measuring the length. The average of all the readings is the width of the fabric. For cut bandages, width shall be measured at every 50 cms., and average reported as width.

Threads per dm.- (For examples not less than 15 m. in length).

Weft. - At the third metre from one extreme locate three places one at about 5 cm.
below the top selvedge, a second in the middle and third at about 5 cm. below the top selvedge, a second in the middle and third about 5 cm. above the bottom selvedge, all three in a vertical row. Take a rectangular plate (made of suitable material such as plastic or aluminium) with the rectangular opening of 5 cm. x 10 cm. cut in it. Keep the plate on the fabric horizontally so that the left 5 cm. side and bottom (10 cm. side) edges of the opening coincides with a weft and warp yarns respectively; count the number of weft yarns within the opening for the length of 10 cm.. Repeat this at the other two selected places, and note down the average of three readings. Repeat this at every third metre in the sample and calculate the average weft per dm.

Warp.- Keep the rectangular plate, this time vertically with left (10 cm. side) and bottom (5 cm. side) edge of opening coinciding with a weft and warp yarn respectively. Count the number of warp yarns within the opening for 10 cm. and note down. Repeat this for about 10 selected places in the samples taking care that the same set of warp yarns is not counted more than twice and calculate the average warp per dm. Magnifying glass mounted on stand may be used for counting.

For samples less than 15 m. in length, locate as many different places as the dimension of the fabric permits, the total being not less than 10 for each sample and calculate the warp and weft per dm. as above.

For cut bandages, all the warp threads in the samples are counted, taking care to leave 5 mm at the cut edge, and weft is counted at every 50 cm. at any place about the middle of the bandage.

Weight per unit area.

For samples not less than 15 m. in length, cut out pieces of fabric from the entire length of sample, representative places being taken from areas at every third or fourth metre so that the total area of all the pieces so collected is not less than 3 sq. metre. Weigh the pieces accurately, measure the dimension of each of the pieces and calculate the area and weight of all the pieces. From the average area and average of weight thus obtained, calculate the area per sq. metre.

For samples less than 15 m. length, take pieces in such a manner that the total area of the selected pieces is not less than 20 per cent of the total area of the sample.

For cut bandages, pieces of 50 cm. in length, cut from 5 different cut bandages in a packing should be taken and weight calculated as an average of 5 readings.

Absorbency. - Take a glass trough of approximate size length 30 cm. x width 30 cm. x depth 25 cm. with straight thick walls and flat bottom. Fill it almost full with distilled water leaving only about 5 cm. from the top rim of trough. Maintain the water at 27o C ± 1o C.

Cut out from any five places located equidistant down the length of the entire sample, square pieces, each weighting one gm. (±10 per cent). Fold each piece in such a manner that a square of approximately 5 cm. x 5 cm. is obtained. Keep one of the folded test specimen between two glass plates and place 1 kg weight on the top for 10 minutes. Remove the weight. Lift the specimen with forceps and gently place it on to the surface of water (the specimen should be lightly pinched in the middle with a blunt forceps having no serrations).
As soon as the specimen touches the water surface start a stopwatch which is stopped when the entire sample disappears below the surface of the water. Record the time taken. Repeat the test with the other four-test specimens. Calculate the average time in seconds.

Foreign Matter Dry about 5 g. of the sample to constant weight at 105o C and weigh the dried sample accurately. Extract the dried sample with chloroform for one hour in an apparatus for the continuous extraction of drugs. Remove the extracted sample to a beaker and allow the evaporation of residual chloroform. Wash the material 12 times with hot water, using about 1000 ml. for each washing and wringing the material by hand after each washing; pass all water through a fine sieve (100 mesh). Place the washed material and any loose threads or fibres from sieve in a beaker, cover with a 0.5 per cent aqueous solution of diastase and maintain at 50oC until free from starch. Allow to cool, filter the solution through a sieve;
return sample and loose fibre to a beaker. Repeat the washing process as before with hot water. Dry the material to constant weight at 105oC, and determine the loss in weight.
Calculate the percentage of foreign matter, which is equal to the loss in weight, with reference to the sample dried to constant weight, at 105o C.

If the sample is tested with iodine and is known to be free from starch, the treatment with solution of diastase and the second series of washing with hot water may be omitted.

Cloth for manufacture of Plaster of Paris Bandages, cut and uncut.

Synonyms.- Bleached Bandage Cloth for Plaster of Paris, Rolled Bandage for Plaster of Paris.

Cloth for Plaster of Paris Bandages shall consist of cotton cloth of leno weave made from yarn of suitable count. It may be supplied cut or uncut of various widths and lengths.

Description

(a) For uncut bandages.- Cotton cloth of leno weave, in one continuous length showing no joints or seams, and with selvedges. The cloth is bleached to a good white, is clean and odourless and reasonably free from weaving defects as well as from seed and leaf debris; the cloth may be dressed if necessary and if so, shall not dust off when unrolled.

(b) For cut bandages. - Same as for uncut bandages except for selvedges which shall not be included and the bandages shall be cut evenly with straight edges and be reasonably free from loose threads.

Threads per dm:

Warp. - Average not less than 150/dm; and Weft.- average not less than 75/dm.

Weight in gm/m2: - 35 ± 5

Length and width:

The length and width for uncut bandages shall not be less than 98 per cent each of the length and width stated. For cut bandages a tolerance of ±5 cm. in length and ±0.5 cm. in width may be allowed, and each of the bandages in packing complies with these requirements.

Fluorescene

When viewed under screened ultra-violet light not more than occasional points of fluorescence are observed.

Packing, Labelling and Storage

Bandage Cloth for Plaster of Paris shall be packed securely so as to allow normal handling and transport without tearing and exposing the contents. In packages of cut and rolled bandages, each bandage shall also individually be warpped in suitable paper. The package shall be labelled as ―Cloth for Plaster of Paris Bandage‖. The net content is stated on the label in terms of number of rolls and length and width. Bandage Cloth for Plaster of Paris must be stored in packed condition protected from dust.

1[SCHEDULE F (III)

(See rule 124-D) STANDARDS FOR UMBILICAL TAPES (A) Standards for Sterilised Umbilical Polyster Tape.

Description. - A uniform strand of Polyester yarn prepared by braiding and may be finished with a suitable silicone finishing material, white to yellowish-white in colour. Tape shall be sterilized by Gamma Radiation or other suitable method approved by the Licensing Authority.

Other requirements. - The Umbilical Polyester Tape shall conform to the claims made on the label in respect of length and width.

Tensile strength. - The Umbilical Polyester Tape shall have Tensile strength of not less than 4 kg. on straight pull.

Packing and labelling. - The Umbilical Polyester Tape shall be packed in sealed Polythene bags or sealed plastic containers which ensure that when packed, the tape is sterile.
The packing shall protect the tape from contamination and damage. Every packing offered for sale shall bear a clear and permanent marking with the following particulars: -

(i) The proper name of the drug i.e. Umbilical Polyester Tape ̳Sterile‘ (ii) Manufacturer‘s name and address.
(iii) Batch number.
(iv) Licence number under which the tape is manufactured.
(v) Date of manufacture and date of expiry.
(vi) Length and width of the Tape.

Storage condition. - It should be stored in a cool place protected from light.

(B) Standards for Sterilised Umbilical Cotton Tape–

Description. - A uniform strand of cotton yarn prepared by braiding and may be finished with a suitable silicone finishing material, white to yellowish-white in colour. The tape shall be sterilized by Gamma Radiation or by any other suitable method approved by the Licesing Authority.

Other Requirement. - The Umbilical Cotton Tape shall conform to the claims made on the label in respect of length and width.

Tensile strength. - The Umbilical Cotton Tape shall have a Tensile strength of not less than 4 kg. on straight pull.

Packing and labelling. - The Umbilical Cotton Tape shall be packed in sealed Polythene bags or sealed plastic containers which ensure that when packed the tape is sterile.
The packing shall protect the tape from contamination and damage. Every packing offered for sale shall bear a clear and permanent marking with the following particulars:- (i) The proper name of drug i.e. Umbilical Cotton Tape ―Sterile‖.
(ii) Manufacturer‘s name and address.
1. Ins. by G.S.R. No.1115(E), dt.. 30-9-1986.

(iii) Batch number.

(iv) Licence number under which the tape is manufactured.
(v) Date of manufacture and the date of expiry.
(vi) Length and width of the Tape.

Storage condition.- It should be stored in a cool place protected from light.]

1[SCHEDULE FF

( See rule 126-A)

Standards for ophthalmic preparations.
Part-A. Ophthalmic Solutions and suspensions.
Ophthalmic Solutions and Suspensions shall-

(a) be sterile when dispensed or when sold in the unopened container of the manufacturer, except in case of those ophthalmic solutions and suspensions which are not specifically required to comply with the test for ̳Sterility‘ in the Pharmacopoeia;

(b) contain one or more of the following suitable substances to prevent the growth of micro-organisms:-

(i) Benzalkonium Chloride, 0.01 per cent (This should not be used in solutions of nitrates or salicylates).

(ii) Phenyl mercuric nitrate, 0.001 per cent.
(iii) Chlorbutanol 0.5 per cent.
(iv) Phenyl ethyl alcohol 0.5 per cent.

Provided that solutions used in surgery shall not have any preservative and be packed in single dose container.

Provided further that the Licensing Authority may in his discretion authorise the use of any other preservative or vary the concentration prescribed on being satisfied that its use affords equal guarantee for preventing the growth of micro-organisms:-

(c) be free from foreign matter;

(d) be contained in bottles made of either neutral glass or soda glass specially treated to reduce the amount of alkali released when in contact of aqueous liquids, or in suitable plastic containers which would not in any way be incompatible with the solutions;

The droppers to be supplied with the containers of ophthalmic solutions and suspensions shall be made of neutral glass or of suitable plastic material and when supplied separately shall be packed in sterile cellophane, or other suitable packings;

(e ) In addition to complying with the provisions of labelling laid down in the rules the following particulars shall also be shown on the label:-

1. Added by Notification No. F-1-13/69-D , dt.. 3-1-1970.

(1) of the containers

(i) The statement ̳Use the solution within one month after opening the container‘.
(ii) Name and concentration of the preservative, if used.
(iii) The words ̳NOT FOR INJECTION‘.

(2) of container or carton or package leaflet (i) Special instructions regarding storage, wherever applicable.
(ii) A cautionary legend reading as

―WARNING (i) if irritation persists or increases, discontinue the use and consult the phycian.

(ii) Do not touch the dropper tip or other dispensing tip to any surface since this may contaminate solutions‖.

Part B: Ophthalmic Ointments

Ophthalmic Ointments shall-

(a) be sterile when dispensed or when sold in the unopened container of the manufacturer;

(b) be free from foreign matter;

(c) in addition to complying with the provisions for labelling laid down in the rules the following particulars shall be shown on the container or carton or package leaflet-

(i) Special instructions regarding storage wherever applicable;
(ii) A cautionary legend reading

―Warning :- If irritation persists or increases discontinue the use and consult Physicians‖].

Aminopterin L-Asparaginase Bleomycin Busulphan; its salts Carbutamide Chlorambucil;its salts 1[SCHEDULE G]

(See Rule 97) Chlorothiazide and other derivatives of 1, 2, 4 benzothiadiazine Chlorpropamide; its salts Chlorthalidone and other derivatives of Chlorobenzene compound.
2[(Cis-Platin)] Cyclophosphamide; its salts 2[(Cytarabine)] Daunorubicin Di-Isopropyl Eluorophosphate Disodium Stilboestrol Diphosphate Doxorubicin Hydrochloride Ethacrynic Acid, its salts Ethosuximide Glibenclamide Hydantoin; its salts; its derivatives, their salts Hydroxyurea Insulin, all types 2 [(Lomustine Hydrochloride)] Mannomustine; its salts Mercaptopurine; its salts Metformin; its salts Methsuximide Mustine, its salts Paramethadione Phenacemide Phenformin; its salts 5-Phenylhydantoin; its alkyl and aryl derivatives; its salts Primadone 1[(Procarpazine Hydrochloride])

1. Subs.. by G.S.R. No.462(E) , dt. 22-6-1982 (w.e.f. 22.6.1982).
2. Ins. by G.S.R. No.626(E) , dt. 2-7-1987 w.e.f. 2-7-1987.

Quinthazone

Sarcolysine 1[(Sodium-2-Mercaptoethanesulfonate] Tamoxiten Citrate Testolactone Thiotepa Tolbutamide Tretamine; its salts Troxidone

Antihistaminic substances the following, their salts, their derivatives, salts of their derivatives

Antazoline Bromodiphenhydramine Buclizine Chlorcyclizine Chlorpheniramine Clemizole Cyproheptadine Diphenhydramine Diphenylpyraline Doxylamine Succinate Isothipendyl Mebhydrolin Napadisylate

Meclozine Phenindamine Pheniramine Promethazine Thenalidine Triprolidine Substances being tetra-N-Subs. derivatives of Ethylene Diamine or Prophylenediamine.

Note . – Preparations containing the above substances excluding those intended for topical or external use are also covered by this Schedule.]

Subs.. by G.S.R. No.462(E) , dt. 22-6-1982 (w.e.f. 22.6.1982).

Subs. by G.S.R. No.160(E), dated 16.3.2006 .
Omitted by G.S.R 588(E) dated 30-8-2013 Omitted by G.S.R 602(E) dated 19-7-2010 Omitted by G.S.R 724(E) dated 7-11-2013

Abacavir Abciximab Acamprosate calcium Acebutol hydrochloride Aclarubicin Albendazole 1[SCHEDULE - H (See Rules 65 and 97) PRESCRIPTION DRUGS Artesunate Articaine hydrochloride Atenolol Atracurium besylate injection Atorvastatin Auranofin Alclometasone dipropionate Actilyse Acyclovir Adenosine Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (acth) Alendronate sodium Alopurinol Alphachymotrypsin 2[Alprazolam Alprostadil Amantadine hydrochloride Amifostine Amikacin sulphate Amiloride hydrochloride Amineptine Aminoglutethimide Amino salicylic acid Amiodarone hydrochloride Amitriptyline Amlodipine besylate Amoscanate Amoxopine Amrinonelactate Analgin Androgenic anabolic, oestrogenic & progestational substances Antibiotics Apraclonidine Aprotinin Organic compound of arsenic Arteether Artemether Azathioprine Aztreonam Bacampicillin Baclofen Balsalazide Bambuterol Barbituric acid Basiliximab Benazepril hydrochloride Benidipine hydrochloride Benserazide hydrochloride Betahistine dihydrochloride Bethanidine sulphate Bezafibrate Bicalutamide Biclotymol monohydrate /lactate Bifonazole Bimatoprost Biperiden hydrochloride Biphenyl acetic acid Bitoscanate Bleomycin Primonidine tartrate Bromhexine hydrocloride Bromocriptine mesylate Budesonide Bulaquine Bupivacaine hydrochloride Bupropion Buspirone Butenafine hydrochloride Butorphanol tartrate

Subs. by G.S.R. No.160(E), dated 16.3.2006 .
Omitted by G.S.R 588(E) dated 30-8-2013 Omitted by G.S.R 602(E) dated 19-7-2010 Omitted by G.S.R 724(E) dated 7-11-2013

Cabergoline Calcium dobesilate Candesartan Capecitabine Captopril Carbidopa Carbocisteine Carboplatin Carboquone Carisoprodol L-carnitine Carteolol hydrochloride Carvedilol Cefadroxyl Cefatoxime sodium Cefazolin sodium 2[Cefdinir Cefepime hydrochloride Cefetamet pivoxil Cefpirome Cefpodoximepoxetil Ceftazidime pentahydrate Ceftizoxime sodium] Cefuroxime Celecoxib Centchroman Centbutindole Centpropazine Cetirizine hydrochloride 2[Chlordiazepoxide Chlormezanone
107. 3 [ * * *] Chlorpromazine Chlorzoxazone Ciclopiroxolamine Cimetidine Cinnarizine Ciprofloxacin hydrochloride Cisplatin Citalopram hydrobromide Clarithromycin Clavulanic acid Clidiniumbromide Clindamycin Clobazam Clobetasol propenate Clobetasone 17-butyrate 2[Clofazimine] Clofibrate Clonazepam Clonidine hydrochloride Clopamide Clopidogrel bisulphate Clostebolacetate Clotrimazole Clozapine 2[Codeine] Colchicine Corticosteroids Cotrimoxazole Cyclandelate Cyclosporins Daclizumab Danazole Dapsone Desloratadine Desogestrol Dexrazoxane Dextranomer 2[* * *] Dextropropoxyphene 2[Diazepam] Diazoxide Diclofenac sodium/potassium/acid Dicyclomin hydrochloride Didanosine Digoxine Dilazep hydrochloride Diltiazem Dinoprostone 2[Diphenoxylate, its salts] Dipivefrin hydrochloride Di-sodiumpamidronate Disopyramide Docetaxel Domperidone Donepezil hydrochloride Dopamine hydrochloride Dothiepin hydrochloride Doxapram hydrochloride Doxazosin mesylate Doxepin hydrochloride

Subs. by G.S.R. No.160(E), dated 16.3.2006 .
Omitted by G.S.R 588(E) dated 30-8-2013 Omitted by G.S.R 602(E) dated 19-7-2010 Omitted by G.S.R 724(E) dated 7-11-2013

Doxorubicin hydrochloride Drotrecogin-alpha Ebastine Econozole Efavirenz Enalapril meleate Enfenamic acid Epinephrine Epirubicine Eptifibatide
178. Ergot, alkaloids of whether hydrogenated or not, their homologoues, salts Esomeprazole Estradiol succinate Estramustine phosphate Etanercept Ethacridine lactate 2[Ethambutol hydrochloride] Ethamsylate Ethinyloestradiol 2[Ethionamide] Etidronate disodium Etodolac Etomidate Etoposide Exemestane Famciclovir Famotidine Fenbendazole Fenofibrate Fexofenadine Finasteride Flavoxate hydrochloride 5-fluorouracil Fludarabine Flufenamic acids Flunarizine hdrochloride Fluoxetine ydrochloride Flupenthixol Fluphenazine enanthate and decanoate Flurazepam Flurbiprofen Flutamide Fluticasone propionate Fluvoxamine maleate Formestane Fosfestril sodium Fosinopril sodium Fossphenytoin sodium Fotemustine Gabapentin Galanthamine hydrobromide Galamine, its salts, its quaternary compound Gancyclovir Ganirelix Gatifloxacin Gemcitabine Gemfibrozil Gemtuzumab Genodeoxycholic acid Gliclazide Glimepiride Glucagon Glycopyrrolate Glydiazinamide Goserelin acetate Granisetron Guanethidine Gugulipid Halogenated hydroxyquinolines Haloperidol Heparin Hepatitis b. Vaccine Hyaluronidase Hydrocorisone 17-butyrate Hydrotalcite Hydroxizine Ibuprofen Idebenone Indapamide Imipramine Indinavir sulphate Indomethacin Insulin human Interferon Intravenous fat emulsion Iobitridol Iohexol Iopamidol Iomeprol Iopromide Irbesartan Irinotecan hydrochloride

Subs. by G.S.R. No.160(E), dated 16.3.2006 .
Omitted by G.S.R 588(E) dated 30-8-2013 Omitted by G.S.R 602(E) dated 19-7-2010 Omitted by G.S.R 724(E) dated 7-11-2013

Iron preparation for parenteral use Isepamicine Isocarboxside Isoflurane
264. Isonicotnic acid hydrazine and other-hydragine derivatives of isonicotinic acid Isosorbide dinitrate/ mononitrate Isotretinoin Isoxsuprine Itopride 4[***] Ketoconazole Ketoprofen Ketorolactromethamine Labetalol hydrochloride Lacidipine Lamivudine Lamotrigine Latanoprost Lefunomide Lercanidipine hydrochloride Letrozole Leuprolide acetate Levamesole Levarterenol Levobunolol Levocetirizine Levodopa 2[Levofloxacin] Levovist Lidoflazine Linezplid Lithium carbonate Lofepramine decanoate Loperamide Lorazepam Losartan potassium Loteprednol Lovastatin Loxapine Mebendazole Mebeverine hydrochloride Medroxyprogesterone acetate Mefenamic acid Mefloquine hydrochloride Megestrol acetate Meglumine iocarmate Melagenina Elitracenhydrochloride Meloxicam Mephenesin, its esters Mephentermine 2[Meropenam] Mesterolone Metaxalone Methicillin sodium Methocarbamol Methotraxate Metoclopramide Metoprolol tartrate Metrizamide Metronidazole Mexiletine hydrochloride Mianserin hydrochloride Miconazole 2[Midazolam] Mifepristone Milrinone lactate Miltefosine Minocycline Minoxidil Mirtazapine Misoprostol Mitoxantrone hydrochloride Mizolastine Moclobemide Mometasone furoate Montelukast sodium Morphazinamide hydrochloride Mosapride 2[Moxifloxacin] Mycophenolate mofetil Nadifloxacin Nadolol Nafarelin acetate Nalidixic acid Naproxen Narcotics drugs listed in Narcotic Drugs & Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985

Subs. by G.S.R. No.160(E), dated 16.3.2006 .
Omitted by G.S.R 588(E) dated 30-8-2013 Omitted by G.S.R 602(E) dated 19-7-2010 Omitted by G.S.R 724(E) dated 7-11-2013

Natamycin Nateglinide N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate Nebivolol Nebumetone Nelfinavir mesilate Netilmicin sulphate Nevirapine Nicergoline Nicorandil Nifedipine Nimesulide Nimustine hydrochloride 2[Nitrazepam] Nitroglycerin Norethisterone enanthate Norfloxacin Octylonium bromide Ofloxacin Olanzapine Omeprazole Ornidazole Orphenadrine Orthoclone sterile Oxazepam Oxazolidine Oxcarbazepine Oxethazaine hydrochloride Oxiconazole Oxolinic acid Oxprenolol hydrochloride Oxybutynin chloride Oxyfedrine Oxymetazoline Oxyphenbutazone Oxytocin Ozothine Paclitaxel Pancuronium bromide Pantoprazole Para-amino benzene sulphonamide, its salts & derivatives Parp-amino salicylic acid, its salts, its derivatives Parecoxib Paroxetine hydrochloride D-penicilamine 2[Pentazocine] Pentoxifylline Pepleomycin Phenelzineh sulphate Phenobarbital Phenothiazine, derivatives of and salts of its derivatives Phenylbutazine Pimozide Pindolol Pioglitazone hydrochloride Piracetam Piroxicam Pituitory gland, active principles of, not otherwise specified in this schedule and their salts Polidocanol Polyestradiol phosphate Poractant alfa Praziquantel Prednimustine iothalamates Prednisolone stearoylglycolate Prenoxdiazinhydro-chloride Promazine hydrochloride Promegestone Propafenon hydrochloride Propanolol hydrochloride Propofol Protristyline hydrochloride 2[Pyrazinamide] Pyrvinium Quetiapine fumerate Quinapril Quinidine sulphate Rabeprazole Racecadotril Raloxifene hydrochloride

Subs. by G.S.R. No.160(E), dated 16.3.2006 .
Omitted by G.S.R 588(E) dated 30-8-2013 Omitted by G.S.R 602(E) dated 19-7-2010 Omitted by G.S.R 724(E) dated 7-11-2013

Ramipril hydrochloride Ranitidine Rauwolfia, alkaloids of, their salts, derivatives of the alkaloids or rauwolfia Reboxetine Repaglinide Reproterol hydrochloride Rilmenidine Riluzone Risperidone Ritonavir Ritodrine hydrochloride Rituximab Rivastigmine Rocuronium bromide Ropinirole Rosoxacin.
Rosiglitazone meleate Salbutamol sulphate Salicyl-azo-sulphapyridine Salmon calcitonin Saquinavir Satranidazole Secnidazole Septopal beads & chains Serratiopeptidase Sertraline hydrochloride Sibutramine hydrochloride Sildenafil citrate Simvastatin Sirolimus Sisomicin sulphate S-neominophagen Sodiumpico sulphate Sodium cromoglycate Sodium hyaluronate Sodium valproate Sodium and maglumine iothalamates Somatostatin Somatotropin Sotalol 2[Sparfloxacin] Spectinomycin hydrochloride Spironolactone Stavudine Sucralfate Sulphadoxine Sulphamethoxine Sulphamethoxypyridazine Sulphaphenazole Sulpiride Sulprostone hydrochloride Sumatriptan Tacrine hydrochloride Tamsulosin hydrochloride Trapidil Tegaserod maleate Teicoplanin Telmisartan Temozolamide Terazosin Terbutaline sulphate Terfenadine Terizidone Terlipressin Testosteroneun decoanoate Teratolol hydrochloride Thalidomide 2[Thiacetazone] Thiocolchicoside Thiopropazate, its salts Thymogene Thymosin-alpha1 Tiaprofenic acid Tibolone Timolol maleate Tinidazole Tizanidine Tabramycin Tolfenamic acid Topiramate Topotecan hydrochloride 2[Tramadolhydrochloride] Tranexamic acid Tranylcypromine, its salts Trazodone

Subs. by G.S.R. No.160(E), dated 16.3.2006 .
Omitted by G.S.R 588(E) dated 30-8-2013 Omitted by G.S.R 602(E) dated 19-7-2010 Omitted by G.S.R 724(E) dated 7-11-2013

Note:- 1. Preparations exempted under proviso to para 2 of Note to Schedule X shall also be covered by this Schedule.
2. The salts, esters, derivatives and preparations containing the above substances excluding those intended for topical or external use (except ophthalmic and ear / nose preparations con- taining antibiotics and/ or steroids) are also covered by this Schedule.
3. The inclusion of a substance in this Schedule does not imply or convey that the substance is exempted from the provisions of Rule 122A/122B.”

1[SCHEDULE H1 (See Rules 65 and 97)

Alprazolam Doripenam Balofloxacin Ertapenem Buprenorphine Ethambutol Hydrochloride Capreomycin Ethionamide Cefdinir Feropenam Cefditoren Gemifloxacin Cefepime Imipenem Cefetamet Isoniazide Cefixime Levofloxacin Cefoperazone Meropenem Cefotaxime Midazolam Cefpirome Moxifloxacin Cefpodoxime Nitrazepam Ceftazidime Pentazocine Ceftibuten Prulifloxacin Ceftizoxime Pyrazinamide Ceftriaxone Rifabutin Chlorodiazepoxide Rifampicin Clofazimine Sodium Para-aminosalicylate Codeine Sparfloxacin Cycloserine Thiacetazone Diazepam Tramadol Diphenoxylate Zolpidem Note:- Preparations containing the above drug substances and their salts excluding those intended for topical or extrenal use (except ophthalmic and ear or nose preparations) containing above substances are also covered by this Schedule.

Ins. by G.S.R 588(E) , dt. 30.8.203.
Tretinoin Trifluperazine Trifluperidol hydrochloride Triflusal Trimetazidine dihydrochloride Trimipramine Tripotassium dicitrate bismuthate Tromantadine hydrochloride Urokinase Valsartan Vasopressin Vecuronium bromide Venlafaxine hydrochloride Verapamil hydrochloride Verteporfin Vincristine sulphate Vinblastine sulphate Vindesine sulphate Vinorelbine tatrate Xipamide Zidovudine hydrochloride Ziprasidone hydrochloride Zoledronic acid 2[Zolpidem] Zopiclone Zuclopenthixol

1SCHEDULE I (Omited)

2[SCHEDULE J (See rule 106)

DISEASES AND AILMENTS (BY WHATEVER NAME DESCRIBED) WHICH A DRUG MAY NOT PURPORT TO PREVENT OR CURE OR MAKE CLAIMS TO PREVENT OR CURE.

1. AIDS
2. Angina Pectoris
3. Appendicitis
4. Arteriosclerosis
5. Baldness
6. Blindness
7. Bronchial Asthma
8. Cancer and Benign tumour
9. Cataract
10. Change in colour of the hair and growth of new hair.
11. Change of foetal sex by drugs.
12. Congenital malformations
13. Deafness
14. Diabetes
15. Diseases and disorders of uterus.
16. Epilepticfits and psychiatric disorders
17. Encephalitis
18. Fairness of the skin
19. Form, structure of breast
20. Gangrene
21. Genetic disorders
22. Glaucoma
23. Goitre
24. Hernia
25. High/low Blood Pressure
26. Hydrocele
27. Insanity
28. Increase in brain capacity and improvement of memory.
29. Improvement in height of children/adults.
30. Improvement in size and shape of the sexual organ and in duration of sexual performance
31. Improvement in the strength of the natural teeth.
32. Improvement in vision
33. Jaundice/Hepatitis/Liver disorders 34 Leukaemia
35. Leucoderma
36. Maintenance or improvement of the capacity of the human being for sexual pleasure.
37 Mental retardation, subnormalities and growth
38. Myocardial infarction
39. Obesity
40. Paralysis

1. Schedule I omitted by G.S.R 462(E) , dt. 22.6.1982
2. Subs. by G.S.R. 21(E) , dt. 11.1.1996.

41. Parkinsonism
42. Piles and Fistulae
43. Power to rejuvinate
44. Premature ageing
45. Premature greying of hair
46. Rheumatic Heart Diseases
47. Sexual Impotence, Premature ejaculation and spermatorrhoea
48. Spondylitis
49. Stammering
50. Stones in gall-bladder, kidney, bladder
51. Vericose Vein.]

SCHEDULE K (See rule 123)

Class of Drugs Extent and Conditions of Exemption
1. Drugs falling under clause (b) (i) of Section 3 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, not intended for medicinal use.
All the provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the Rules thereunder, subject to the conditions that the drug is not sold for medicinal use or for use in the manufacture of medicines and that each container is labelled conspicuously with the words ―NOT FOR MEDICINAL USE.‖ 1[2.* * *]

2[2A. Quinine and other antimalarial drugs.
3[Persons selling the drugs by retail under arrangements made by State Government for sale and distribution of the drugs will be exempted from the requirement to take out licences for retail sale under clause (c) of Section 18 of the Act.] 4[3.* * *]

4[4.* * *]

5[5. Drugs supplied by a registered medical practitioner to his own patient or any drug specified in Schedule C supplied by a registered medical practitioner at the request of another such practioner if it is specially prepared with reference to the condition and for the use of an individual patient provided the registered medical practitioner is not (a) keeping an open shop or (b) selling across the counter or (c) engaged in the importation, manufacture, distribution or sale of drugs in India to a degree which render him liable to the provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the rules thereunder.
All the provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the Rules made thereunder, subject to the following conditions :
5[1. The drugs shall be purchased only from a dealer or a manufacturer licensed under these rules, and records of such purchases showing the names and quantities of such drugs, together with their batch numbers and names and addresses of the manufacturers shall be maintained. Such records shall be open to inspection by an Inspector appointed under the Act, who may, if necessary, make enquiries about purchases of the drugs and may also take samples for test.]
2. In the case of medicine containing a substance specified in 6[Schedule G, H or X] of the following additional conditions shall be complied with:- a. the medicine shall be labelled with the

name and address of the registered medical practitioner by whom it is supplied;
b. if the medicine is for external application it shall be labelled with the words 7[***] ―For external use only‖ or, if it is for internal use with the dose;
c. the name of the medicine or ingredients of the preparation and the quantities thereof, the dose prescribed, the name of the patient & the date of supply and the name of the person who gave the prescription shall be entered at the time of supply in register to be maintained for the purpose;
d. the entry in the register shall be given a number and that number shall be entered on the label of the container;
e. the register and the prescription, if any, on which the medicines are issued shall be preserved for not less than two years from the date of the last entry in the register or the date of the prescription, as the case may be.
8[3. The drug will be stored under proper storage conditions as directed on the label.]

9[4. No drug shall be supplied or dispensed after the date of expiration of potency recorded on its container, label or wrapper or in violation of any statement or direction recorded on such container, label or wrapper.] 10[5A. Drugs supplied by a hospital or dispensary maintained or supported by Government or local body 11[***] The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the Rules thereunder which require them to be covered by a sale licence, subject to the following conditions :
(1) The dispensing and supply of drugs shall be carried out by or under the supervision of a qualified person;
(2) The premises where drugs are supplied or stocked shall be open to inspection by an Inspector appointed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act who can, if necessary, take samples for test;
(3) The drugs shall be stored under proper storage conditions.
(4) 12[The drugs shall be purchased from a manufacturer or a dealer licensed under these rules or received as transferred stocks from hospital stores for distribution.
Records of such purchases or receipts shall be maintained.] (5) 13[No drug shall be supplied or dispensed after the date of expiration of potency recorded on its container, label or wrapper

or in violation of any statement or direction recorded on such container, label or wrapper.] 14[5B. Whole Human Blood IP and / or its components stored for transfusion by a First Referral Unit, Community Health Centre, Primary Health Centre and a Hospital.

The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the rules made thereunder which require obtaining of a licence for operation of a Blood Ban k or processing Whole Human Blood and / or its components, subject to the following conditions, namely: - (1) The First Referral Unit, Community Health Centre, Primary Health Centre and / or any Hospital shall be approved by the State / Union Territory Licensing Authority after satisfying the conditions and facilities through inspection.
(2) The captive consumption of Whole Human Blood IP or its components in the First Referral Unit, Community Health Centre, Primary Health Centre and / or any Hospital shall not be more than 2000 units annually.
(3) The Whole Human Blood an d / or its components shall be procured only from Government Blood Bank and / or Indian Red Cross Society Blood Bank and / or Regional Blood Transfusion Centre duly licensed.
(4) The approval shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of issue unless sooner suspended or cancelled and First Referral Unit, Community Health Centre, Primary Health Centre and / or any Hospital shall apply for renewal to the State Licensing Authority three months prior to the date of expiry of the approval.
(5) The First Referral Unit, Community Health Centre, Primary Health Centre and / or any Hospital shall have the following technical staff for storage of blood or its components:
(a) A trained Medical Officer for proper procurement, storage and cross matching of blood and / or its components. He / she shall also be responsible for identifying haemolysed blood and ensure non-supply of date expired blood or its components.
(b) A blood bank Technician with the qualification and experience as specified in Part XII B of Schedule F or an experienced laboratory technician trained in blood grouping and cross matching.

(6) The First Referral Unit, Community Health Centre, Primary Health Centre and / or any Hospital shall have an area of 10 sq.
metres. It shall be well lighted, clean and preferably air- conditioned. Blood bank refrigerator of appropriate capacity fitted with alarm device and temperature indicator with regular temperature monitoring shall be provided to store blood units between 2° C to 8° C and if the components are proposed to be stored, specialized equipment‘s as specified in Part XII B of Schedule F shall also be provided.
(7) The First Referral Unit, Community Health Centre, Primary Health Centre and / or any Hospital shall maintain records and registers including details of procurements of Whole Human Blood IP and / or blood components, as required under Part XII B Schedule F.
(8) (8) The First Referral Unit, Community Health Centre, Primary Health Centre and / or any Hospital shall store samples of donors blood as well as patients sera for a period seven days after transfusion.
15[6.* * *]

7.Quinine Sulphate The provisions of sub-section (a) (i) of Section 18 of the Act to the following extent- (i) the colour of the drug may be pink, owing to its being coloured with an edible pink colouring matter;
(ii) the B. P. tests for readily carbonisable substances produce a yellow colour of an intensity about four times the colour produced with quinine sulphate conforming to the B.P. standard;
(iii) other Cinchona alkaloids present shall not exceed six per cent; and (iv) the residue on incineration shall not exceed
0.14 per cent.

16[8.* * *]

17[9. Magnesium Sulphate The provisions of sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of Section 18 of the Act to the following extent:- Chlorides present in the salt shall not exceed 0.12 per cent in the case of the produce prepared from sea water.] 18[10. The following substances which are used both as articles of food as well as drugs - (i) all condensed or powdered milk whether All provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the Rules thereunder

pure, skimmed or malted, fortified with vitamins and minerals or otherwise.
(ii) Farex, Oats, 19[***] and all other similar cereal preparations whether fortified with vitamins or otherwise excepting those for parenteral use.
(iii) Virol, Bovril, Chicken essence and all other similar predigested foods.
(iv) 20[Ginger, Pepper, Cumin, Cinnamon and all other similar spices and condiments unless they are specially labelled as conforming to the standards in the Indian Pharmacopoeia

or the

Official Pharmacopoeia and official compendia of drug standards prescribed under the Act and Rules made thereunder.]

21[11.* * *]

22[12. Substances intended to be used for destruction of vermin or insects which cause disease in human beings or animals, viz.
Insecticides and Disinfectants.]

The provision of Chapter IV of the Act and Rules thereunder, which require them to be covered by a sale licence 23[subject to the condition that provision of condition (17) of Rule 65 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 are complied with by the person stocking or selling such substances.] 24[13. The following household remedies, namely- (1) 25[Aspirin tablets.] (2) 26[Paracetamol Tablets.] (3) Analgesic Balms.
(4) Antacid preparations.
(5) Gripe Water for use of infants.
(6) Inhalers, containing drugs for treatment of cold and nasal congestion.
(7) Syrups, lozenges, pills and tablets for cough.
(8) Liniments for external use.
(9) Skin ointments and ointments for burns.
(10) Absorbent cotton wool, bandages absorbent guaze and adhesive plaster.
(11) Castor Oil, liquid Paraffin and Epsom Salt.
(12) Eucalyptus Oil (13) Tincture Iodine, Tincture Benzoi n C o. and Mercurochrome in containers not exceeding 100 ml.
(14) Tablets of Quinine Sulphate I.P.
(15) Tablets of Iodochlorohydroxy quinoline-250 mg.

The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the Rules thereunder which require them to be covered with a sales licence in Form 20-A subject to the following conditions— (a) The drugs are sold only in a village having population of not more than one thousand persons and where there is no licensed dealer under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act;
(b) The drugs do not contain any substance specified in 27[Schedules G, H or X];
(c) The drugs are sold in the original unopened containers of the licensed manufacturers;
(d) When the drugs are sold under clause (a) condition 3 under ―Conditions of licence‖ of Form 20-B shall not apply.

28[14. Mechanical Contraceptives The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and Rules thereunder, which require them to be

covered by a sale licence 29[subject to the condition that the provisions of condition (17) of Rule 65 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945, are complied with by the person stocking or selling mechanical contraceptives.] 30[14A.
Vaginal contraceptive pessaries containing Nonoxynol.
The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the Rules made thereunder which require them to be covered by a sale licence subject to the condition that the provisions of clause (17) of Rule 65 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 are complied with by the person stocking or selling this contraceptive.] 31[15. Chemical contraceptive having the following composition per tablet :
(1) DL-Norgestrel-0.30 mg.
Ethinyloestradiol-0.03 mg.

(2) Levonorgestrel-0.15 mg.
Ethinyloestradiol-0.03 mg.
(3) Centchroman-30mg.
(4) 32[Desogestrel -0.150mg.
Ethinyloestradiol 0.030mg.

(5) Levonorgestrel 0.1mg.
Ethinyloestradiol 0.02mg The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the rules made thereunder which required them to be covered by a sale licence.] 33[16. Cosmetics The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the Rules made thereunder, which require them to be covered by a licence for sale provided that the cosmetics sold, if of Indian origin, are manufactured by licensed manufacturers.] 34[17. Ophthalmic ointments of the Tetracycline group of drugs Persons authorised by the Government to distribute or sell the drugs under the National Trachoma Control Programme shall be exempted from the provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the Rules made thereunder, which require the drugs to be covered by a sale licence.] 35[18.* * *]

36[19. Hair Fixers, namely mucilaginous preparations containing gums, used by men for fixing beard.

The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the rules thereunder.]

37[20. Radio Pharmaceuticals.

All the provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the rules made thereunder.]

38[21. Tablets of Chloroquine Salts.

The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and Rules thereunder, which require them to be covered by a sale licence, provided the drug in strip pack is sold under the Commercial Distribution Scheme of the National Malaria Eradication Programme and duly labelled as

―National Malaria Eradication ProgrammeMinistry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India.‖]

39[22. Sales from restaurant cars of trains and from coastal ships of household remedies, which do not require the supervision of a qualified person for their sale.

The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the rules thereunder which require them to be covered by a sale licence, subject to the following conditions, namely - (a) the records of purchase and sale of drugs shall be maintained by the person in charge of sale of such drugs, which shall be available for inspection by an Inspector appointed under the Act;
(b) the place where such drugs are stocked shall be open to inspection by a n Inspector appointed under the Act who can, if necessary, takes samples for test.]

40[23. Drugs supplied by ( i ) Multipurpose Workers attached to Primary Health Centres/Sub- Centres, (ii) Community Health Volunteers under the Rural Health Scheme, (iii) Nurses, Auxiliary Nurses, Midwives an d Lady Health Visitors attached to Urban Family Welfare Centres/Primary Health Centres/SubCentres and 41[(iv) Anganwadi Workers].
All The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and Rules thereunder, which require them to be covered by a sale licence, provided the drugs are supplied under the Health or Family Welfare Programme of the Central or State Government.]

42[24. Homoeopathic medicines supplied by a registered Homoeopathic medical practitioner to his own patient or Homoeopathic medicines supplied by a registered

Homoeopathic

medical practitioner at the request of another such practitioner provided the registered Homoeopathic medical practitioner is not (a) keeping an open shop, or (b) selling across the counter or, (c) engaged in the importation, manufacture, distribution or sale of Homoeopathic medicines in India to a degree which renders him liable to the provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the rules made thereunder All the provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the rules made thereunder subject to the following conditions:— (1) The Homoeopathic medicines shall be purchased only from a dealer or a manufacturer licensed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.
(2) The premises where the Homoeopathic Medicines are stocked shall be open to inspection by an Inspector appointed under the Act, who may, if necessary, ―take samples for test.]‖

43[25. Preparations applied to human body for the purpose of repelling insects like mosquitoes.

The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and Rules thereunder which require them to be covered by a sale licence subject to the conditions that such a product has been manufactured under a valid drug manufacturing licence.
44[26. Medicated Dressing and Bandages for First Aid.

The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and Rules thereunder which require them to be covered by a sale licence subject to the conditions that such a product has been manufactured under a valid drug manufacturing licence.]

45[27. Oral Rehydration Salts (Manufactured as per the following formula) :
o Sodium chloride 3.5 g/litre.
o Trisodium citrate dehydrate 2.9 g/litre o Potassium Chloride 1.5 g/ litre.
May be replaced by Sodium bicarbonate(Sodium hydrogen Carbonate) 2.5 g/ litre, when citrate salt is not available.

The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and Rules thereunder which required them to be covered by a sale licence, subject to the conditions that such a product has been manufactured under a valid drug manufacturing Licence.] 46[28. White or Yellow Petroleum Jelly I.P. (Non-perfumed).

The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and Rules thereunder which required them to be covered by a sale licence, subject to the condition that such a product has been manufactured under a valid drug manufacturing Licence.

47[29. Morphine Tablets The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the rules made thereunder which require them to be covered by a sale licence, subject to the following conditions, namely: - (i) The drug shall be supplied by the Palliative Care Centres approved by the State Government to terminally ill cancer patients

(ii) The drug shall be kept under the custody of the Medical Officer in charge of the said Centre.

(iii) The drug shall be purchased from a dealer or a manufacturer who holds licence under these rules and records of such purchases showing the names and quantities together with their batch numbers and names and addresses of the manufacturers or dealers and the names and addresses of the patients to whom supplies have been made shall be maintained. Such records shall be open to inspection by an inspector appointed under the Act, who may also take samples for test.
30. Whole Human Blood collected and transfused by Centres r un by Armed Forces Medical Services in border areas, small midzonal hospitals including peripheral hospitals, Field Ambulances, Mobile medical units and other field medical units including blood supply units in border, sensitive and field areas.

All the provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and rules made thereunder which require them to be covered by a licence to operate a Blood Bank for collection, storage and processing of whole human blood for sale or distribution subject to the following conditions:- (i) These Centres shall collect, process and transfuse blood in emergent situations which require lifesaving emergency surgeries/or transfusion.
(ii) These Centres shall be under the active direction and personal supervision of a qualified Medical Officer, possessing the

qualifications and experiences specified in condition (i) of rule 122-G.

(iii) Each blood unit shall be tested before use for freedom from HIV I and II antibodies, Hepatitis B surface antigen, malarial parasites and other tests specified under the monograph ―Whole Human Blood‖ in current edition of Indian Pharmacopoeia

(iv) These Centres shall have adequate infrastructure facilities for storage and transportation of blood.
(v) The blood collected and tested by such Centres shall be transfused by the Centre itself and may be made available for use of other peripheral Armed Forces hospitals or Centres during operational circumstances.]

48[31. The following Homoeopathic Medicines, namely: -

49[(a) ***

(b) Homoeopathic Ointments, each 50[in 25gm.
Tube]:
(i) Arnica Montana (ii) Calendula Officinalis (iii) Cantharis (iv) Rhus Toxicodendron

(c) Biochemic tissue remedies in tablet forms, in generic names only, each in 20gm. Packing in 3X and 6X trituration- (i) Calcarea Phosphorica (ii) Calcarea Sulphurica (iii) Ferum Phosphoricum (iv) Kali Muriaticum (v) Kali Phosphoricum (vi) Kali Sulphuricum (vii) Magnesium Phophoricum (viii) Magnesia Sulphurica (ix) Natrum Muriaticum (x) Natrum Phophoricum (xi) Natrum Sulphuricum (xii) Silica

(d) Homoeopathic medicines, mentioned below, in pills, each in 30C potency, in sealed original packing of manufacturer of 8 gms:
(i) Arnica Montana (ii) Aconitum Napellus (iii) Arsenicum Album The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the rules made thereunder which require them to be covered with a sale licence in Form 20C, subject to the following conditions: - (i) These homoeopathic medicines shall be sold in the original sealed small quantity packings of the licensed manufacturers.

(ii) These medicines may be stocked and sold by retail of medicines licensed under rule 61.

(iii) These medicines shall be stored separately from other allopathic drugs.

(iv) These medicines shall be purchased from a manufacturer or a dealer licensed under these rules.

(v) The purchase and sale records of these medicines shall be maintained by the dealer for minimum period of three years.

(vi) These medicines shall be labelled in generic / pharmacopoeial names only.

(iv) Aloe Socotrina (v) Apis Mellifica (vi) Allium Cepa (vii) Bryonia Alba (viii) Borax (ix) Belladonna (x) Cantharis (xi) Carbo Vegatabilis (xii) Cina (xiii) Colocythis (xiv) Calendula Officinalis (xv) Caulophyllum Thalictroides (xvi) Cocculus Indicus (xvii) Chamomilla (xviii) Drosera Rotundifolia (xix) Hypeicum Perforatum (xx) Hepar Sulphur (xxi) Ipecacuanha (xxii) Ledum Palustre (xxiii) Millefolium (xxiv) Mercurius Solubilis (xxv) Nux Vomica (xxvi) Pulsatilla Nigricans (xxvii) Podophyllum Peltatum (xxviii) Plantago Major (xxix) Rhus Toxicodendron (xxx) Ruta Graveolens (xxxi) Symphytum Officinalis (xxxii) Veratrum Album 51[(e) All biochemic and its combinations (1 to 28), in tablet forms, in sealed original packing of the manufacture.]

52[32. First Aid kit supplied along with motor vehicle by the manufacturer or its distributors at the time of first sale of vehicle.
The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and rules made thereunder which require them to be covered by a sale licence, subject to the condition that the drug items are procured from a manufacturer or a dealer licensed under the rules.] 53[33. Nicotine gum 54[and Lozenges] containing upto 2 mg of nicotine

The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the Rules made thereunder which require them to be covered by a sale license subject to the condition that such a product has been manufactured under a valid drug manufacturing license.]

55[34. Production of Oxygen 93 per cent USP, produced from air by the molecular sieve process, by a hospital or Medical Institute for their captive consumption.
The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the Rules made thereunder which require them to be covered by manufacturing licence under the rules, provided that the production facilities shall be open to inspection by an Inspector appointed under the Act, who can, if necessary, take samples For test‖.]

56[35. Homoeopathic hair oils having active ingredients up to 3X potency only The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the rules made thereunder which require them to be covered with a sale licence 57[***] subject to the condition that such a product has been manufactured under a valid manufacturing licence and sold in the original sealed packing of the licensed manufacturers.] 58[36. Custom made devices All provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the rules made thereunder, subject to the condition that the device being specifically made in accordance with a duly qualified medical practitioner‘s written prescription under his responsibility, in accordance with specific design characteristics and is intended for the sole use of a particular patient and the label should bear the word ―custom made device.‖ Explanation.–– Mass produced devices which only need adoption to meet the specific requirements of the medical practitioner or any other professional user shall not be considered to be custom made devices.]
1. Item 2 omitted by Government of India Notification No. F.1-56/47-D, dt. 16.1.1950).
2. Added by Notification No .F. I-2/47-D dt. 13-2-1950.
3. Amended by Notification No. F. I-22/59-D dt.. 9-4-1960.
4. Item 3 and 4 omitted by Notification No. F.I-6/62-D dt. 2-7-1969.
5. Subs. by G.S.R. 1074, dt: 19.8.1978.
6. Subs. by G.S.R. 462 (E), dt: 22.6.1982.
7. Certain words omitted by G.S.R. 462 (E), dt: 22.6.1982.
8. Ins. by G.S.R. 460 (E), dt: 20.6.1984.
9. Ins. by G.S.R. 592 (E), dt: 13.8.2008.
10. Added by notification No. F.1-22/59-D, dt: 9.4.1960.
11. Certain words omitted by G.S.R. 812 (E), dt: 14.11.1994.
12. Ins. by G.S.R. 648 (E), dt: 16.9.2002.
13. Ins. by G.S.R. 592 (E), dt: 13.8.2008.
14. Ins. by G.S.R. 909 (E), dt: 20.12.2001.
15. Item 6 omitted by G.S.R. 681 (E), dt: 5.12.1980.
16. Item 8 omitted by G.S.R.1185 (E), dt: 18.8.1964.
17. Added by notification No. F.1-19/50-D.S, dt: 30.3.1953.
18. Added by notification No. DR/Sch.Ddk/F.1-40/54-D.S., dt: 27.1.1955.
19. Omitted by G.S.R. 665 (E), dt: 6.5.1977.
20. Subs. by G.S.R. 19, dt: 15.12.1977.
21. Item 11 omitted by notification No. F.1-36/64-D (G.S.R 1188), dt: 17.8.1964.
22. Amended by notification No. F.1-20/60-D (S.O.400), dt: 24.1.1964.
23. Added by G.S.R. 926, dt: 24.6.1977.
24. Added by notification No. F.1-19/59-D, dt: 13.6.1961.
25. Subs by S.O. 2139, dt: 5.6.1972.
26. Subs. by G.S.R. 1060(E), dt: 5.9.1986.
27. Subs. by G.S.R. 462 (E), dt: 22.6.1982.
28. Added by notification No. F.1-39/61-D (S.O. 1057), dt: 23.3.1964.
29. Added by G.S.R. 926, dt: 24.6.1977.
30. Ins. by G.S.R. 784 (E), dt: 28.8.1989.
31. Subs by G.S.R. 730 (E), dt: 10.12.1991.
32. Ins. by G.S.R. 648 (E), dt: 16.9.2002.
33. Added by notification No. F.1-36/64-D (G.S.R 1183), dt: 17.8.1964.
34. Added by notification No. F.1-21/63-D (G.S.R 70), dt: 4.1.1965.
35. Item 18 is omitted by G.S.R. 1594, dt: 28.10.1976.
36. Added by S.O. 2139, dt: 5.6.1972.
37. Added by G.S.R. 926, dt: 24.6.1977.

38. Added by G.S.R. 697 (E), dt: 11.11.1977.
39. Ins. by G.S.R. 1241, dt: 15.9.1979.
40. Ins. by G.S.R. 540 (E), dt: 22.9.1980.
41. Ins. by G.S.R. 784 (E), dt: 28.8.1989.
42. Ins. by G.S.R. 680 (E), dt: 5.12.1980.
43. Ins. by G.S.R. 1060 (E), dt: 5.9.1989.
44. Ins. by G.S.R. 371 (E), dt: 24.3.1988.
45. Ins. by G.S.R. 677 (E), dt: 2.6.1988.
46. Ins. by G.S.R. 753 (E), dt: 4.11.1999.
47. Ins. by G.S.R. 6 (E), dt: 4.1.2001.
48. Ins. by G.S.R. 218 (E), dt: 28.3.2001.
49. Sub-item (a) relating to ―Arnica Montana Hair Oil‖ omitted by G.S.R. 917 (E), dt: 22.12.2009.
50. Subs. by G.S.R. 592 (E), dt: 13.8.2008.
51. Ins. by G.S.R. 592 (E), dt: 13.8.2008.
52. Ins. by G.S.R. 648 (E), dt: 16.9.2002.
53. Ins. by G.S.R. 549 (E), dt: 16.7.2003.
54. Ins. by G.S.R. 101 (E), dt: 18.2.2001.
55. Ins. by G.S.R. 734 (E), dt: 21.12.2005.
56. Ins. by G.S.R. 917 (E), dt: 22.12.2009.
57. The words ―in Form 20C‖ omitted by G.S.R. 107 (E), dt: 17.2.2015.
58. Ins. By G.S.R. 890 (E), dt: 25.9.2014.

1[SCHEDULE L (Omitted)

2[SCHEDULE L-I (see rules 74, 78 and 150E)

GOOD LABORATORY PRACTICES AND REQUIREMENTS OF PREMISES AND
EQUIPMENTS
1. General Requirements:- (a) The laboratory or the organisation of which it is a part must be an entity that is legally authorised to function and can be held legally responsible.
(b) It is the responsibility of the management to ensure that the laboratory carry out its testing, calibration, validation, and all other technical activities in such a way as to meet Good Laboratory Practices (GLP) requirements.
(c) Laboratory management shall have a qualified individual to be known as quality manager or technical manager for carrying out all technical activities and for the implementation of documented quality system and shall report to the top management directly.
(d) The quality manager shall prepare a schedule for technical audit of the laboratory for GLP compliance by an expert or experts appointed by the top-management other than the in-charge of the laboratory and shall ensure the maintenance of documented quality system as per quality manual.
2. Premises:- (a) (i) the laboratories shall be designed, constructed and maintained so as to prevent entry of insects and rodents besides cross contamination;
(ii) interior surface (walls, floor, and ceilings) shall be smooth and free from cracks, and permit easy cleaning and disinfection;
(iii) adequate provision is made not only for space and equipment for carrying out necessary test but also for utilities like water, power and gas;
(iv) air ventilation system shall ensure dust free environment.
(b) The laboratories shall be provided with adequate lighting and ventilation and if necessary, air- conditioning to maintain satisfactory temperature and relative humidity that will not adversely affect the testing and storage of drugs or the accuracy of the functioning of the laboratory equipments or instruments.
(c) The drainage system facilities shall be such as to facilitate proper maintenance and prevent water logging in the laboratory.
(d) Tabletops shall be constructed with acid, alkali and solvent resistant material and shall be smooth and free from crevices as far as possible.
(e) All bio-medical laboratory waste shall be destroyed as per the provisions of the Bio-- Medical waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 1996.
(f) Adequate space with proper storage conditions in the laboratory shall be provided for keeping reference and working standards and be maintained by the quality control department. Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for the maintenance of reference standards and evaluation of Working and Secondary standards shall be prepared by the laboratory.
(g) The air circulation is maintained in the area where sterility test is carried out as per Schedule‘M‘.
(h) Bio-burden shall be routinely maintained in the controlled and uncontrolled area, (e.g.
air locks)

Schedule L omitted by G.S.R. 462 (E), dt: 22.6.1982.
Ins. by G.S.R. 780 (E), dt: 10.11.2008.

(i) Animals House:- (i) Animal House shall have the approval of the Committee for the Purpose of Control and Supervision on Experiments on Animals (CPCSEA).
(ii) Designed in such a way that there is an arrangement to quarantine the new animals procured or purchased and have a provision for clean corridor and dirty corridor.
(iii) In case of a diseased animal proper diagnosis shall be done and proper record of treatment shall be maintained.
(iv) Different types of animals shall be housed separately with proper identification.
(v) A Standard Operating Procedure shall be prepared for breeding and care of animals, maintenance, cleaning or sanitation with suitable schedule for cleaning of animal cages, racks, floor and other equipments.
(vi) The animal house shall have proper air-conditioning (temperature and humidity) with proper lighting and be monitored regularly and documented periodically.
3. Personnel- (a) Staff in the laboratory shall possess necessary qualification, proper training and shall have adequate, experience for the assigned duties.
(b) A training record of all the personnel shall be maintained.
(c) Head of the laboratory must be of high professional standing with experience in drug analysis and laboratory management who is responsible for.
(i) ensuring the control and maintenance of documents including the quality system as per the requirements of regulatory authorities which involves all raw data, SOPs, documentation exhibits, protocols, training charts, etc;
(ii) planning and organising the audit of the quality system and initiation as well as follow up action of the corrective actions, if any;
(iii) investigation of technical complaints;
(iv) taking finai responsibilities for recommending any regulatory action in the event of noncompliance of tested samples.
4. Equipments:- (a) The laboratory shall be furnished with all types of equipments as may be necessary for carrying out the different activities within the laboratory.
(b) The analytical instruments shall be housed in dust-free environment and whenever required, conditions of temperature and humidity shall be maintained and periodic checks on temperature and humidity be made and recorded.
(c) The instruments, instrument bench and surrounding areas shall be kept clean and tidy at ail times.
(d) Instruments requiring calibration shall be calibrated at regular intervals and records of such calibration or maintenance be maintained and there shall be written instructions in the form of Standard Operating Procedures for the operation, maintenance and calibration of instruments.
(e) Equipment records shall be maintained and such records shall contain the following:- (i) name of equipment or machine or apparatus;
(ii) manufacturer ‘s name, model number and type of identification;
(iii) serial number;
(iv) date on which equipment was received in laboratory;
(v) current location;
(vi) condition when received (e.g. new, used, re-conditioned);
(vii) copy of the manufacturer ‘s operating instructions;
(viii) frequency of calibration;
(ix) frequency of maintenance;
(x) log Book (day to day entry including status of the equipment) (xi) staff responsible for monitoring the calibration and maintenance status of the equipment;

(xii) calibrating records;
(xiii) list of authorised users or operators, if any;
(xiv) history of any damage, malfunction, modification or upgradation, repair and calibration;
(xv) list of spares and accessories, if any.
(f) A progress register for non-functional equipments and action for procurement of spares and accessories, monitoring thereof, shall be maintained.
(g) A Standard Operating Procedure for preventive maintenance of machine or equipment or apparatus shall be prepared by the laboratory.
(h) Other equipments such as burettes, pipettes, volumetric flasks, weight boxes, thermometers, etc., shall be thoroughly checked for accuracy of calibration before acceptance for use.
(i) Maintenance procedure in the form of Standard Operating Procedures must be prepared and regular servicing must be performed by the maintenance engineer or specialist (j) Equipments, instruments giving anomalous results or defective must be labeled as ̳outof- order‘ till they are repaired and after instrument is repaired it should be calibrated before use.
(k) The maintenance of equipments for services like electricity, gas, water, steam, and compressed gas shall be handled by competent person.
(l) Autoclaves must meet the requirements described for operations, safety and validation procedures, and the validation carried out by the laboratory shall be recorded.
(m) Fume Cupboards.- Work involving the evolution of harmful and obnoxious vapours shall be carried out in a fume cupboard. The exhaust system of the fume cupboard shall be checked frequently to ensure that it is in order. There should be a water drainage system inside the fume cupboard and shall be checked frequently to ensure that there is no water logging and it is in order.
5. Chemicals and Reagents:
(a) The storage and handling of chemicals and reagents shall be done in a manner considering the physicochemical properties of these substances and the hazards involved in their use.
(b) All reagents and solutions in the laboratory shall be properly identified with a label.
(c) A standardisation register shall be maintained by the laboratory along with its raw data and Standard Operating Procedure for preparation and standardisation on stock solutions, standard solutions, volumetric solutions must be prepared for the guidance of staff.
(d) Containers of stock solutions and of standard solutions shall bear the following details:- (i) name of analytical chemist who prepared the solution;
(ii) date of preparation;
(iii) Each volumetric solution shall have ―use before date‖ depending upon the stability of the solution; and (iv) standardization records.
(e) The transfer of hazardous chemicals and regents from one container to another container shall be carried out with suitable equipment by taking the care of safety and no make-shift or hazardous methods must be resorted to.
6. Good house keeping and safety.- (a) General and specific written down instructions for safety shall be circulated to each staff member and the instructions be revised periodically as appropriate (e.g., poster displays, audio- visual material and by seminars/conferences) (b) Standard Operating Procedure for safety, house-keeping and loss prevention shall be prepared in accordance with the various rules, and regulations of the Government of India and include the following requirements, namely:- (i) safety data sheets must be made available to staff before testing is carried out;

(ii) drinking, eating and smoking shall not be permitted in the laboratories; food for human consumption shall not be kept in working or storage areas; food meant for test animals shall be handled by the workers under the guidance of a veterinary doctor or qualified person. In the animal house, the facilities for collection and disposal of animal waste or safe sanitary storage of waste before removal from testing be provided;
(iii) staff must wear laboratory coats or other protective clothing including gloves and face masks and eye protection wherever required;
(iv) the laboratories shall have adequate first aid kit and fire fighting equipments located at the right places and the staff must be familiar and trained with the use of fire fighting equipment including fire extinguishers, fire blankets and gas masks, (v) operators carrying out sterility tests shall wear sterilised garments including headgear, face masks and shoes;
(vi) the staff must be educated in the first aid techniques, emergency care and use of antidotes; and (vii) safety rules in handling cylinders of compressed gases must be observed and staff must be familiar with relevant colour identification codes;
(c) Protective Precautions to be taken in Laboratories:
(i) water showers shall be installed at appropriate places in the laboratory;
(ii) rubber suction bulbs must be used on manual pipettes and siphons;
(iii) warnings, precautions, and written instructions must be given for work with violent, uncontrollable or dangerous reactions (e.g. mixing water and acids, biological such as infectious agents, etc.); .
(iv) appropriate facilities for the collection, storage, and disposal of wastes shall be made available;
(v) staff must be aware of methods for safe disposal of corrosive or dangerous products by neutralisation or deactivation and of the need for complete disposal of mercury and its salts.
(vi) staff must also be aware about the safety precautions to be adopted while handling potassium cyanide and cyanogen bromide.
(vii) a Standard Operating Procedure for handling, collection, disposal of chemical and biological wastes be prepared.
7. Maintenance, calibration, and validation of equipments:- (a) All equipments, instruments and other devices used in the laboratory shall use appropriate methods and procedures for all tests or calibrations and they shall be regularly calibrated and validated. The frequency of calibration may differ from instrument to instrument.
(b) The original equipment manufacturer ‘s recommendations along with the experience of the laboratory staff and the use of equipment per day may also be considered while fixing the frequency of calibration.
(c) For most of the equipments and instruments, Standard Operating Procedures for calibration and calibration schedule be prepared by the laboratory and a logbook shall also be prepared by each laboratory for proper documentation of calibration results.
8. Reference materials:- (a) Reference materials are necessary for the testing and, or calibration, validation or verification of a sample or of equipment, instruments or other devices and all such materials shall be traceable to agency authorised by Government of India or any other International body .
(b) The laboratory shall prepare working standard by comparing with the reference standards and shall be routinely checked for their purity by selecting parameters such as identity, loss on drying or on water, impurity and assay, etc.
(c) Whenever, any new reference material is received by the laboratory, a code number shall be assigned and this code number shall be quoted on the laboratory note book and analytical work sheet. The working standard shall also be provided with identification

code.
(d) A register pertaining to reference and working materials must be maintained by the laboratory. The following details may be mentioned in the register:
(i) source of supply;
(ii) code number of the reference material;
(iii) date of receipt;
(iv) batch number or identification number of the supplying agency;
(v) details like assay value, water content or any other information provided;
(vi) storage condition of the material; and (vii) date of expiry, if any and date of manufacturing if possible (e) All working standards shall be checked at appropriate intervals or before use to ensure that it has not deteriorated or decomposed during storage. These observations be recorded in a register: All the reference and working standards shall be stored at appropriate storage condition; those requiring storage between 2-8°C shall be stored in a refrigerator. Wherever recommended the material may not be allowed to be frozen.
9. Microbiological Cultures:- (a) Standard Operating Procedure for maintenance of microbial culture and sub-culture must be prepared by the laboratories.
(b) If the cultures have become non-viable or mutant, proper procedure shall be followed to destroy these cultures by autoclaving under an authorised personnel for biological testing. Preferably not more than five passages may be prepared.
(c) All activities be carried out in a aseptic area by authorised person.
(d) The laboratories shall perform standard biochemical tests on the sub-culture as given in literature to ensure their viability.
10. Quality system.- The quality system shall be designed to ensure the following objectives:- (a) The measurements and calibrations shall fully conform to the compendial requirements and the methods demonstrably based on validation protocols are followed.
(b) It shall be effective in providing necessary assurance that the activities or processes or techniques or practices comply with planned arrangements.
(c) It helps in early detection and correction of non conformities.
(d) Remedial action on the observations by internal and external audits are taken appropriately and (e) It shall have a documented quality policy for the organisation.
11. Internal quality system audits.- (a) Internal audits are done to assure the integrity of the analysis‘ and such audits shall be conducted periodically with a predetermined schedule and procedure with appropriate checklist, to verify that the operations continue to comply with the requirements of quality system and requirements of regulatory authorities. Internal quality audits shall be carried out by trained and qualified personnel who are independent of the activity to be audited.
(b) The periodicity of quality audit shall be fixed by the Head of the laboratory so that each activity is audited at least once in a year.
(c) Head of the laboratory will be responsible for initiation of the corrective action arising from audits and verification of corrective action.
(d) Whenever any non-compliance or any diversion is noticed by the team in implementing quality policy or quality system, protocols, the same will be attended by the Quality Manager. The problem will be analysed and necessary actions will be taken with proper documentation.
(e) The Quality Manager shall maintain all the records of the analysis being conducted which includes test system, the type of analysis, date on which analysis is done, etc and quality Manager shall also maintain copies of all protocols pertaining to different activities being checked by the audit team.
12. Management review – Quality system reviews shall be conducted by the top management at least once in every

twelve months and the agenda of review shall generally cover the following:- (i) report or input of internal audits;
(ii) matter arising from previous reviews;
(iii) report of external audits, if any;
(iv) surveillance report, if any;
(v) result of proficiency testing;
(vi) complaints or feedback received from users of laboratory services;
(vii) details of in-house quality control checks;
(viii) need of amendment of the quality system and documentation;.
(ix) induction training of new staff; and (x) any other requirements of the laboratory.
13. Standard Operating Procedures:- (a) Standard Operating Procedures are written procedures for different activities being conducted in a laboratory and shall include the following characteristics:
(i) they shall be written in a chronological order listing different steps leading to an analysis of drugs or calibration of an instrument:
(ii) testing laboratories shall have Standard Operating Procedure manuals and have its periodic review;
(iii) it shall be user friendly documents and shall include designation of the person responsible for intended activity.
(b) Standard Operating Procedures in addition to those recommended under various activities shall also be prepared to the minimum in respect of the following:
(i) sample handling and accountability;
(ii) receipt identification, storage, mixing and method sampling of the test and control articles;
(iii) record keeping, reporting, storage and retrieval of data;
(iv) coding of different studies, handling of data including use of computerized data system;
(v) operation of technical audit personnel in performing and reporting audits, inspections and final report reviews;
(vi) routine inspection of cleaning, maintenance, testing, calibration and standardisation of instruments;
(vii) action to be taken in respect of equipment failure;
(viii) analytical data methods;
(ix) the raw data;
(x) data handling and storage retrieval;
(xi) health and safety protection;
(xii) animal room preparations;
(xiii) animal care;
(xiv) storage and maintenance of microbial cultures;
(xv) maintenance of sterility room (i.e. constant maintenance and monitoring of Aseptic condition of sterility room);
(xvi) use and storage of reference standards;
(xvii) procurement of stores and equipment;
(xviii) monitoring of testing of samples;
(xix) method of retention of unexpended samples, their location, maintenance and disposal;
(xx) document control;
(xxi) redressal of technical complaints;
(xxii) housing-keeping;
(xxiii) corrective and preventing action;
(xxiv) working procedure (test methods);
(xxv) calibration Manual; and (xxvi) training manual.
14. Protocols and specifications archive.-

(a) Every laboratory shall have a specification archive and. current versions of all necessary specifications shall be kept as per the requirements of the Act and the rules made thereunder and the National Pharmacopoeia (Indian Pharmacopoeia).
(b) All updates and corrections must be noted in the master volumes of Pharmacopoeias to prevent the use of obsolete sections; supplement and addendum shall also be made available in the laboratory.
(c) The specification archive shall contain the following :- (i) list of all the pharmacopoeias;
(ii) a file on patent and proprietary medicines (non-pharmacopoeial) test methods to specifications prepared and validated by the manufacturer or by the laboratory itself. The test methods shall be submitted to the ·concerned Drug Control Authority. The validated test methods developed by the manufacturer or the laboratory shall stand to the requirements of compendial parameters in regard to its precision, accuracy, reproducibility, specificity, linearity, and ruggedness etc.
15. Raw data:- (a) Raw data refers to the laboratory work sheet, note books or analysis sheet, records, and other activities and such raw data shall include hand written notes, photographs, software, drawings, computer printouts, spectral charts, dictated observations or recorded data from automated equipments. The raw data also includes record on receipt of animals, result of environmental monitoring, calibration, records of equipments, integrator output from analytical equipment, including work-sheet used to read a note, information from Light Emitting Diode (LED) display of any equipment.
(b) A single line shall strike through the data being changed; the correct information shall be recorded along with the old data and the reason of change. The analyst making the change shall be identified by his signature with date. In case of automated data collection system, the person responsible shall be identified at the time of data output.
The original entry must be saved and the system have audit trial for all the data.
(c) Data integrity and security shall be maintained and the data shall not be accessible to any unauthorised person.
16. Storage and archival.- (a) The residual sample shall be retained in proper storage condition for a period of one year after the final report.
(b) The laboratory must establish and maintain procedures for the identification collection, indexing, retrieval, storage, maintenance, and disposal of all quality documents.
(c) All the raw data, documentation, Standard Operating Procedures, protocols, and final reports are to be retained and there shall be archives for orderly storage and expeditious retrieval of all raw data, documentation, protocols, interim and final report. The archive shall provide a suitable environment that will prevent modification, damage, or deterioration and/or loss.
(d) The condition under which the original documents are stored must ensure their security and confidentiality, (e) Paper documents shall not be kept for long periods under high humidity and raw data in the form of tape and discs are to be preserved with care, (f) In case of storage of only optical disc, the life of disc shall be longer than the storage time, (g) Raw data on thermal paper might fade away with time; therefore, a photocopy of the thermal paper shall also be retained in the archive.
(h) Time for which records are retained shall be prescribed in the documents.

1[SCHEDULE M (See Rules 71, 74, 76 and 78)

GOOD MANUFACTURING PRACTICES AND REQUIREMENTS OF PREMISES,
PLANT AND EQUIPMENT FOR PHARMACEUTICAL PRODUCTS

Note: To achieve the objectives listed below, each licensee shall evolve appropriate methodology, systems and procedures which shall be documented and maintained for inspection and reference; and the manufacturing premises shall be used exclusively for production of drugs 2[and no other manufacturing activity shall be undertaken therein except in respect of units licensed prior to 11th December, 2001].

PART 1

GOOD MANUFACTURING PRACTICES FOR PREMISES AND MATERIALS

1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:

1.1. Location and surroundings.- The factory building(s) for manufacture of drugs shall be so situated and shall have such measures as to avoid risk of contamination from external environment including open sewage, drain, public lavatory or any factory which produce disagreeable or obnoxious odour or fumes, excessive soot, dust, smoke, chemical or biological emissions.

1.2. Buildings and premises.- The building(s) used for the factory shall be designed, constructed, adapted and maintained to suit the manufacturing operations so as to permit production of drugs under hygienic conditions. They shall conform to the conditions laid down in the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948).

The premises used for manufacturing, processing, warehousing, packaging, labelling and testing purposes shall be –

(i) compatible with other drug manufacturing operations that may be carried out in the same or adjacent area / section;

(ii) adequately provided with working space to allow orderly and logical placement of equipment, materials and movement of personnel so as to:

(a) avoid the risk of mix-up between different categories of drugs or with raw materials, intermediates and in-process material;

(b) avoid the possibilities of contamination and cross- contamination by providing suitable mechanism;

(iii) designed / constructed / maintained to prevent entry of insects, pests, birds, vermins and rodents. Interior surface (walls, floors and ceilings) shall be smooth and free from cracks, and permit easy cleaning, painting and disinfection;

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 894(E) , dt. 11.12.2001.- applicable to manufacturers licensed to manufacture drugs, for the period up to 31.12.2003.
2. Subs. by Act 431(E), dt. 30.6.2005.

(iv) air-conditioned, where prescribed for the operations and dosage forms under production. The production and dispensing areas shall be well lighted, effectively ventilated, with air control facilities and may have proper Air Handling Units (wherever applicable) to maintain conditions including temperature and, wherever necessary, humidity, as defined for the relevant product. These conditions shall be appropriate to the category of drugs and nature of the operation. These shall also be suitable to the comforts of the personnel working with protective clothing, products handled, operations undertaken within them in relation to the external environment. These areas shall be regularly monitored for compliance with required specifications;

(v) provided with drainage system, as specified for the various categories of products, which shall be of adequate size and so designed as to prevent backflow and/or prevent insects and rodents entering the premises. Open channels shall be avoided in manufacturing areas and, where provided, these shall be shallow to facilitate cleaning and disinfection;

(vi) the walls and floors of the areas where manufacture of drugs is carried out shall be free from cracks and open joints to avoid accumulation of dust.
These shall be smooth, washable, coved and shall permit easy and effective cleaning and disinfection. The interior surfaces shall not shed particles. A periodical record of cleaning and painting of the premises shall be maintained.

1.3 Water System. - There shall be validt. system for treatment of water drawn from own or any other source to render it potable in accordance with standards specified by the Bureau of Indian Standards or Local Municipality, as the case may be, so as to produce Purified Water conforming to Pharmacopoeial specification. Purified Water so produced shall only be used for all the operations except washing and cleaning operations where potable water may be used. Water shall be stored in tanks, which do not adversely affect quality of water and ensure freedom from microbiological growth. The tank shall be cleaned periodically and records maintained by the licensee in this behalf.

1.4. Disposal of waste. -

(i) The disposal of sewage and effluents (solid, liquid and gas) from the manufactory shall be in conformity with the requirements of Environment Pollution Control Board.
(ii) All bio-medical waste shall be destroyed as per the provisions of the BioMedical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 1996.
(iii) Additional precautions shall be taken for the storage and disposal of rejected drugs. Records shall be maintained for all disposal of waste.
(iv) Provisions shall be made for the proper and safe storage of waste materials awaiting disposal. Hazardous, toxic substances and flammable materials shall be stored in suitably designed and segregated, enclosed areas in conformity with Central and State Legislations.

2. Warehousing Area:

2.1 Adequate areas shall be designed to allow sufficient and orderly warehousing of various categories of materials and products like starting and packaging materials, intermediates, bulk and finished products, products in quarantine, released, rejected, returned or recalled, machine and equipment spare parts and change items.

2.2 Warehousing areas shall be designed and adapted to ensure good storage conditions. They shall be clean, dry and maintained with acceptable temperature limits. Where special storage conditions are required (e.g. temperature, humidity), these shall be provided, monitored and recorded. Storage areas shall have appropriate house-keeping and rodent, pests and vermin control procedures and records maintained. Proper racks, bins and platforms shall be provided for the storage of materials.

2.3 Receiving and dispatch bays shall protect materials and products from adverse weather conditions.

2.4. Where quarantine status is ensured by warehousing in separate earmarked areas in the same warehouse or store, these areas shall be clearly demarcated. Any system replacing the physical quarantine, shall give equivalent assurance of segregation. Access to these areas shall be restricted to authorized persons.

2.5. There shall be a separate sampling area in the warehousing area for active raw materials and excipients. If sampling is performed in any other area, it shall be conducted in such a way as to prevent contamination, cross-contamination and mix-up.

2.6. Segregation shall be provided for the storage of rejected, recalled or returned materials or products. Such areas, materials or products shall be suitably marked and secured. Access to these areas and materials shall be restricted.

2.7. Highly hazardous, poisonous and explosive materials such as narcotics, psychotropic drugs and substances presenting potential risks of abuse, fire or explosion shall be stored in safe and secure areas. Adequate fire protection measures shall be provided in conformity with the rules of the concerned civic authority.

areas.
2.8. Printed packaging materials shall be stored in safe, separate and secure

2.9. Separate dispensing areas for β (Beta) lactum, Sex Hormones and Cytotoxic substances or any such special categories of product shall be provided with proper supply of filtered air and suitable measures for dust control to avoid contamination. Such areas shall be under differential pressure.

2.10. Sampling and dispensing of sterile materials shall be conducted under aseptic conditions conforming to Grade A, which can also be performed in a dedicated area within the manufacturing facility.

2.11. Regular checks shall be made to ensure adequate steps are taken against spillage, breakage and leakage of containers.

2.12. Rodent treatments (Pest control) should be done regularly and at least once in a year and record maintained.

3. Production area:

3.1. The production area shall be designed to allow the production preferably in uni-flow and with logical sequence of operations.

3.2. In order to avoid the risk of corss-contamination, separate dedicated and selfcontained facilities shall be made available for the production of sensitive pharmaceutical products like penicillin or biological preparations with live micro-organisms. Separate

dedicated facilities shall be provided for the manufacture of contamination causing and potent products such as Beta-Lactum, Sex Hormones and Cytotoxic substances.

3.3. Working and in-process space shall be adequate to permit orderly and logical positioning of equipment and materials and movement of personnel to avoid crosscontamination and to minimize risk of omission or wrong application of any manufacturing and control measures.

3.4. Pipe-work, electrical fittings, ventilation openings and similar service lines shall be designed, fixed and constructed to avoid 1[accumulation of dust]. Service lines shall preferably be identified by colours and the nature of the supply and direction of the flow shall be marked/indicated.

4. Ancillary Areas:

4.1 Rest and refreshment rooms shall be separate from other areas. These areas shall not lead directly to the manufacturing and storage areas.

4.2 Facilities for changing, storing clothes and for washing and toilet purposes shall be easily accessible and adequate for the number of users. Toilets, separate for males and females, shall not be directly connected with production or storage areas. There shall be written instructions for cleaning and disinfection of such areas.

4.3 Maintenance workshops shall be separate and away from production areas.
Whenever spares, changed parts and tools are stored in the production area, these shall be kept in dedicated rooms or lockers. Tools and spare parts for use in sterile areas shall be disinfected before these are carried inside the production areas.

4.4. Areas housing animals shall be isolated from other areas. The other requirements regarding animal houses shall be those as prescribed in rule 150-C(3) of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 which shall be adopted for production purposes.

5. Quality Control Area.

5.1. Quality Control Laboratories shall be independent of the production areas.
Separate areas shall be provided each for physico-chemical, biological, microbiological or radio-isotope analysis. Separate instrument room with adequate area shall be provided for sensitive and sophisticated instruments employed for analysis.

5.2 Quality Control Laboratories shall be designed appropriately for the operations to be carried out in them. Adequate space shall be provided to avoid mix-ups and cross-contamination. Sufficient and suitable storage space shall be provided for test samples, retained samples, reference standards, reagents and records.

5.3. The design of the laboratory shall take into account the suitability of construction materials and ventilation. Separate air handling units and other requirements shall be provided for biological, microbiological and radioisotopes testing areas. The laboratory shall be provided with regular supply of water of appropriate quality for cleaning and testing purposes.

5.4. Quality Control Laboratory shall be divided into separate sections i.e. for chemical, microbiological and wherever required, biological testing. These shall have adequate area for basic installation and for ancillary purposes. The microbiology section shall have arrangements such as airlocks and laminar air flow work station, wherever considered necessary.

6. Personnel:

6.1. The manufacture shall be conducted under the direct supervision of competent technical staff with prescribed qualifications and practical experience in the relevant dosage form and / or active pharmaceutical products.

6.2 The head of the Quality Control Laboratory shall be independent of the manufacturing unit. The testing shall be conducted under the direct supervision of competent technical staff who shall be whole time employees of the licensee.

6.3. Personnel for Quality Assurance and Quality Control operations shall be suitably qualified and experienced.

6.4. Written duties of technical and Quality Control personnel shall be laid and followed strictly.

6.5. Number of personnel employed shall be adequate and in direct proportion to the workload.

6.6. The licensee shall ensure in accordance with a written instruction that all personnel in production area or into Quality Control Laboratories shall receive training appropriate to the duties and responsibility assigned to them. They shall be provided with regular in-service training.

7. Health, clothing and sanitation of workers:

7.1 The personnel handling Beta-lactum antibiotics shall be tested for Penicillin sensitivity before employment and those handling sex hormones, cytotoxic substances and other potent drugs shall be periodically examined for adverse effects. These personnel should be moved out of these sections (except in dedicated facilities), by rotation, as a health safeguard.

7.2 Prior to employment, all personnel, shall undergo medical examination including eye examination, and shall be free from Tuberculosis, skin and other communicable or contagious diseases. Thereafter, they should be medically examined periodically, at least once a year. Records shall be maintained thereof. The licensee shall provide the services of a qualified physician for assessing the health status of personnel involved in different activities.

7.3 All persons prior to and during employment shall be trained in practices which ensure personnel hygiene. A high level of personal hygiene shall be observed by all those engaged in the manufacturing processes. Instructions to this effect shall be displayed in change- rooms and other strategic locations.
7.4 No person showing, at any time, apparent illness or open lesions which may adversely affect the quality of products, shall be allowed to handle starting materials, packaging materials, in-process materials, and drug products until his condition is no longer judged to be a risk.

7.5 All employees shall be instructed to report about their illness or abnormal health condition to their immediate supervisor so that appropriate action can be taken.

7.6 Direct contact shall be avoided between the unprotected hands of personnel and raw materials, intermediate or finished, unpacked products.

7.7 All personnel shall wear clean body coverings appropriate to their duties.
Before entry into the manufacturing area, there shall be change rooms separate for each sex

with adequate facilities for personal cleanliness such as wash basin with running water, 1[clean towels or hand dryers], soaps, disinfectants, etc. The change rooms shall be provided with cabinets for the storage of personal belongings of the personnel.

7.8 Smoking, eating, drinking, chewing or keeping plants, food, drink and personal medicines shall not be permitted in production, laboratory, storage and other areas where they might adversely influence the product quality.

8. Manufacturing Operations and Control:

8.1 All manufacturing operations shall be carried out under the supervision of technical staff approved by the Licensing Authority. Each critical step in the process relating to the selection, weighing and measuring of raw material addition during various stages shall be performed by trained personnel under the direct personal supervision of approved technical staff.

The contents of all vessels and containers used in manufacture and storage during the various manufacturing stages shall be conspicuously labelled with the name of the product, batch number, batch size and stage of manufacture. Each label should be initialled and dt. by the authorised technical staff.

Products not prepared under aseptic conditions are required to be free from pathogens like Salmonella, Escherichia coli, Pyocyanea, etc.

8.2. Precautions against mix-up and cross-contamination:

8.2.1. The licensee shall prevent mix-up and cross-contamination of drug material and drug product (from environmental dust) by proper air-handling system, pressure differential, segregation, status labelling and cleaning. Proper records and Standard Operating Procedures thereof shall be maintained.

8.2.2 The licensee shall ensure processing of sensitive drugs like Beta-Lactum antibiotics, sex hormones and cytotoxic substances in segregated areas or isolated production areas within the building with independent air-handling unit and proper pressure differentials.
1[The effective segregation of these areas shall be validated with adequate records of maintenance and services].

8.2.3 To prevent mix-ups during production stages, material under process shall be conspicuously labelled to demonstrate their status. All equipment used for production shall be labelled with their current status.

8.2.4 Packaging lines shall be independent and adequately segregated. It shall be ensured that all left-overs of the previous packaging operations, including labels, cartons and caps are cleared before the closing hour.

8.2.5 Before packaging operations are begun, steps shall be taken to ensure that the work area, packaging lines, printing machines, and other equipment are clean and free from any products, materials and spillages. The line clearance shall be performed according to an approximate check list and recorded.

8.2.6 The correct details of any printing (for example of batch numbers or expiry dates) done separately or in the course of the packaging shall be rechecked at regular intervals. All printing and overprinting shall be authorized in writing.

8.2.7 The manufacturing environment shall be maintained at the required levels of temperature, humidity and cleanliness.

8.2.8 Authorised persons shall ensure change-over into specific uniforms before undertaking any manufacturing operations including packaging.

8.2.9 1[There shall be segregated secured areas for recalled or rejected material and for such material which are to be reprocessed or recovered.]

9. Sanitation in the Manufacturing Premises:

9.1 The manufacturing premises shall be cleaned and maintained in an orderly manner, so that it is free from accumulated waste, dust, debris and other similar material. A validt. cleaning procedure shall be maintained.

9.2 The manufacturing areas shall not be used for storage of materials, except for the material being processed. It shall not be used as a general thoroughfare.

9.3 A routine sanitation program shall be drawn up and observed, which shall be properly recorded and which shall indicate–

(a) specific areas to be cleaned and cleaning intervals;
(b) cleaning procedure to be followed, including equipment and materials to be used for cleaning; and (c) personnel assigned to and responsible for the cleaning operation.

9.4 The adequacy of the working and in-process storage space shall permit the orderly and logical positioning of equipment and materials so as to minimize the risk of mixup between different pharmaceutical products or their components to avoid cross contamination, and to minimise the risk of omission or wrong application of any of the manufacturing or control steps.

9.5 Production areas shall be well lit, particularly where visual on-line controls are carried out.

10. Raw Materials:

10.1 The licensee shall keep an inventory of all raw materials to be used at any stage of manufacture of drugs and maintain records as per Schedule U.

10.2 All incoming materials shall be quarantined immediately after receipt or processing. All materials shall be stored under appropriate conditions and in an orderly fashion to permit batch segregation and stock rotation by a ̳first in/first expiry‘ – ̳first-out‘ principle. All incoming materials shall be checked to ensure that the consignment corresponds to the order placed.

10.3 All incoming materials shall be purchased from approved sources under valid purchase vouchers. Wherever possible, raw materials should be purchased directly from the producers.

10.4 Authorized staff appointed by the licensee in this behalf, which may include personnel from the Quality Control Department, shall examine each consignment on receipt and shall check each container for integrity of package and seal. Damaged containers shall be identified, recorded and segregated.

10.5 If a single delivery of material is made up of different batches, each batch shall be considered as a separate batch for sampling, testing and release.

10.6 Raw materials in the storage area shall be appropriately labelled. Labels shall be clearly marked with the following information:

(a) designated name of the product and the internal code reference, where applicable, and analytical reference number;

(b) manufacturer‘s name, address and batch number;

(c) the status of the contents (e.g. quarantine, under test, released, approved, rejected); and

(d) the manufacturing date, expiry date and re-test date.

10.7 There shall be adequate separate areas for materials ―under test‖, ―approved‖ and ―rejected‖ with arrangements and equipment to allow dry, clean and orderly placement of stored materials and products, wherever necessary, under controlled temperature and humidity.

10.8 Containers from which samples have been drawn shall be identified.

10.9 Only raw materials which have been released by the Quality Control Department and which are within their shelf-life shall be used. It shall be ensured that shelf life of formulation product shall not exceed with that of active raw materials used.

10.10 It shall be ensured that all the containers of raw materials are placed on the raised platforms/racks and not placed directly on the floor.

11. Equipment:

11.1 Equipment shall be located, designed, constructed, adapted and maintained to suit the operations to be carried out. The layout and design of the equipment shall aim to minimise the risk of errors and permit effective cleaning and maintenance in order to avoid cross-contamination, build-up of dust or dirt and, in general, any adverse effect on the quality of products. Each equipment shall be provided with a logbook, wherever necessary.

11.2 Balances and other measuring equipment of an appropriate range, accuracy and precision shall be available in the raw material stores, production and in-process control operations and these shall be calibrated and checked on a scheduled basis in accordance with Standard Operating Procedures and records maintained.

11.3 The parts of the production equipment that come into contact with the product shall not be reactive, additive or adsorptive to an extent that would affect the quality of the product.

11.4 To avoid accidental contamination, wherever possible, non-toxic/edible grade lubricants shall be used and the equipment shall be maintained in a way that lubricants do not contaminate the products being produced.

11.5 Defective equipment shall be removed from production and Quality Control areas or appropriately labelled.

12. Documentation and Records:– Documentation is an essential part of the Quality assurance system and, as such, shall be related to all aspects of Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP). Its aim is to define the specifications for all materials, method of manufacture and control, to ensure that all personnel concerned with manufacture know the information necessary to decide whether or not to release a batch of a drug for sale and to provide an audit trail that shall permit investigation of the history of any suspected defective batch.

12.1 Documents designed, prepared, reviewed and controlled, wherever applicable, shall comply with these rules.

12.2 Documents shall be approved, signed and dt. by appropriate and authorized persons.

12.3 Documents shall specify the title, nature and purpose. They shall be laid out in an orderly fashion and be easy to check. Reproduced documents shall be clear and legible.
Documents shall be regularly reviewed and kept up to date. Any alteration made in the entry of a document shall be signed and dt..

12.4 The records shall be made or completed at the time of each operation in such a way that all significant activities concerning the manufacture of pharmaceutical products are traceable. Records and associated Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) shall be retained for at least one year after the expiry date of the finished product.

12.5 Data may be recorded by electronic data processing systems or other reliable means, but Master Formulae and detailed operating procedures relating to the system in use shall also be available in a hard copy to facilitate checking of the accuracy of the records.
Wherever documentation is handled by electronic data processing methods, authorized persons shall enter or modify data in the computer. There shall be record of changes and deletions. Access shall be restricted by ̳passwords‘ or other means and the result of entry of critical data shall be independently checked. Batch records electronically stored shall be protected by a suitable back-up. During the period of retention, all relevant data shall be readily available.

Labels and other Printed Materials:– Labels are absolutely necessary for identification of the drugs and their use. The printing shall be done in bright colours and in a legible manner. The label shall carry all the prescribed details about the product.

13.1 All containers and equipment shall bear appropriate labels. Different colour coded labels shall be used to indicate the status of a product (for example under test, approved, passed, rejected).

13.2 To avoid chance mix-up of printed packaging materials, product leaflets, relating to different products, shall be stored separately.

13.3 Prior to release, all labels for containers, cartons and boxes and all circulars, inserts and leaflets shall be examined by the Quality Control Department of the licensee.

13.4 Prior to packaging and labelling of a given batch of a drug, it shall be ensured by the licensee that samples are drawn from the bulk and duly tested, approved and released by the quality control personnel.

13.5 Records of receipt of all labelling and packaging materials shall be maintained for each shipment received indicating receipt, control reference numbers and whether accepted or rejected. Unused coded and damaged labels and packaging materials shall be destroyed and recorded.

13.6 The label or accompanying document of reference standards and reference culture shall indicate concentration, lot number, potency, date on which containers was first opened and storage conditions, where appropriate.

14. Quality Assurance:–This is a wide-ranging concept concerning all matters that individually or collectively influence the quality of a product. It is the totality of the arrangements made with the object of ensuring that products are of the quality required for their intended use.

14.1 The system of quality assurance appropriate to the manufacture of pharmaceutical products shall ensure that: –

(a) the pharmaceutical products are designed and developed in a way that takes account of the requirements of Good Manufacturing Practices (hereinafter referred as GMP) and other associated codes such as those of Good Laboratory Practices (hereinafter referred as GLP) and Good Clinical Practices (hereinafter referred as GCP);

(b) adequate arrangements are made for manufacture, supply and use of the correct starting and packaging materials.

(c) adequate controls on starting materials, intermediate products and bulk products and other in-process controls, calibrations, and validations are carried out.

(d) the finished product is correctly processed and checked in accordance with established procedures;

(e) the pharmaceutical products are not released for sale or supplied before authorized persons have certified that each production batch has been produced and controlled in accordance with the requirements of the label claim and any other provisions relevant to production, control and release of pharmaceutical products.

15. Self Inspection and Quality audit:– It may be useful to constitute a self-inspection team supplemented with a quality audit procedure for assessment of all or part of a system with the specific purpose of improving it.

15.1 To evaluate the manufacturer‘s compliance with GMP in all aspects of production and quality control, concept of self-inspection shall be followed. The manufacturer shall constitute a team of independent, experienced, qualified persons from within or outside the company, who can audit objectively the implementation of methodology and procedures evolved. The procedure for self-inspection shall be documented indicating self-inspection results, evaluation, conclusions and recommended corrective actions with effective follow up program. The recommendations for corrective action shall be adopted.

15.2 The program shall be designed to detect shortcomings in the implementation of Good Manufacturing Practice and to recommend the necessary corrective actions. Selfinspections shall be performed routinely and on specific occasions, like when product recalls or repeated rejections occur or when an inspection by the licensing authorities is announced.
The team responsible for self-inspection shall consist of personnel who can evaluate the implementation of Good Manufacturing Practice objectively; all recommendations for corrective action shall be implemented.

15.3 Written instructions for self-inspection shall be drawn up which shall include the following: -

(a) Personnel.
(b) Premises including personnel facilities.
(c) Maintenance of buildings and equipment (d) Storage of starting materials and finished products.
(e) Equipment.
(f) Production and in-process controls.
(g) Quality control.
(h) Documentation.
(i) Sanitation and hygiene.
(j) Validation and revalidation programmes.
(k) Calibration of instruments or measurement systems.
(l) Recall procedures.
(m) Complaints management.
(n) Labels control.
(o) Results of previous self-inspections and any corrective steps taken.

16. Quality Control System. - Quality control shall be concerned with sampling, specifications, testing, documentation, release procedures which ensure that the necessary and relevant tests are actually carried and that the materials are not released for use, nor products released for sale or supply until their quality has been judged to be satisfactory. It is not confined to laboratory operations but shall be involved in all decisions concerning the quality of the product. It shall be ensured that all quality control arrangements are effectively and reliably carried out.The department as a whole shall have other duties such as to establish, evaluate, validate and implement all Quality Control Procedures and methods.

16.1 Every manufacturing establishment shall establish its own quality control laboratory manned by qualified and experienced staff.

16.2 The area of the quality control laboratory may be divided into Chemical, Instrumentation, Microbiological and Biological testing.

16.3 Adequate area having the required storage conditions shall be provided for keeping reference samples. The quality control department shall evaluate, maintain and store reference samples.

16.4 Standard operating procedures shall be available for sampling, inspecting and testing of raw materials, intermediate bulk finished products and packing materials and, wherever necessary, for monitoring environmental conditions.

16.5 There shall be authorized and dt. specifications for all materials, products, reagents and solvents including test of identity, content, purity and quality. These shall include specifications for water, solvents and reagents used in analysis.

16.6 No batch of the product shall be released for sale or supply until it has been certified by the authorized person(s) that it is in accordance with the requirements of the standards laid down.

16.7 Reference/retained samples from each batch of the products manufactured shall be maintained in quantity which is at least twice the quantity of the drug required to conduct all the tests, except sterility and pyrogen/Bacterial Endotoxin Test performed on the active material and the product manufactured. The retained product shall be kept in its final pack or simulated pack for a period of three months after the date of expiry.

16.8 Assessment of records pertaining to finished products shall include all relevant factors, including the production conditions, the results of in-process testing, the manufacturing (including packaging) documentation, compliance with the specification for the finished product, and an examination of the finished pack. Assessment records should be signed by the in-charge of production and countersigned by the authorised quality control personnel before a product is released for sale or distribution.

16.9 Quality control personnel shall have access to production areas for sampling and investigation, as appropriate.

16.10 The quality control department shall conduct stability studies of the products to ensure and assign their shell life at the prescribed conditions of storage. All records of such studies shall be maintained.

16.11 The in-charge of Quality Assurance shall investigate all product complaints and records thereof shall be maintained.

16.12 All instruments shall be calibrated and testing procedures validt. before these are adopted for routine testing. Periodical calibration of instrument and validation of procedures shall be carried out.

16.13 Each specification for raw materials, intermediates, final products, and packing materials shall be approved and maintained by the Quality Control Department.
Periodic revisions of the specifications shall be carried out whenever changes are necessary.

16.14 Pharmacopoeia, reference standards, working standards, references, spectra, other reference materials and technical books, as required, shall be available in the Quality Control Laboratory of the licensee.

17. Specification

17.1 For raw materials and packaging materials. - They shall include-

(a) the designated name and internal code reference;
(b) reference, if any, to a pharmacopoeial monograph;
(c) qualitative and quantitative requirements with acceptance limits;
(d) name and address of manufacturer or supplier and original manufacturer of the material;
(e) specimen of printed material;
(f) directions for sampling and testing or reference to procedures;
(g) storage conditions; and (h) maximum period of storage before re-testing.

17.2 For product containers and closures:–

17.2.1 All containers and closures intended for use shall comply with the pharmacopoeial requirements. Suitable validt. test methods, sample sizes, specifications, cleaning procedure and sterilization procedure, wherever indicated, shall be strictly followed to ensure that these are not reactive, additive, absorptive, or leach to an extent that significantly affects the quality or purity of the drug. No second hand or used containers and closures shall be used.

17.2.2 Whenever bottles are being used, the written schedule of cleaning shall be laid down and followed. Where bottles are not dried after washing, they should be rinsed with de-ionised water or distilled water, as the case may be.

17.3. For in-process and bulk products. - Specifications for in-process material, intermediate and bulk products shall be available. The specifications should be authenticated.

17.4 For finished products. - Appropriate specifications for finished products shall include: -

(a) the designated name of the product and the code reference;
(b) the formula or a reference to the formula and the pharmacopoeial reference;
(c) directions for sampling and testing or a reference to procedures;
(d) a description of the dosage form and package details;
(e) the qualitative and quantitative requirements, with the acceptance limits for release;
(f) the storage conditions and precautions, where applicable, and (g) the shelf-life.

17.5 For preparation of containers and closures. - The requirements mentioned in the Schedule do not include requirements of machinery, equipments and premises required for preparation of containers and closures for different dosage forms and categories of drugs. The suitability and adequacy of the machinery, equipment and premises shall be examined taking into consideration the requirements of each licensee in this respect.

18. Master Formula Records:

There shall be Master Formula records relating to all manufacturing procedures for each product and batch size to be manufactured. These shall be prepared and endorsed by the competent technical staff i.e. head of production and quality control. The Master Formula shall include: -

(a) the name of the product together with product reference code relating to its specifications;
(b) the patent or proprietary name of the product along with the generic name, a description of the dosage form, strength, composition of the product and batch size;
(c) name, quantity, and reference number of all the starting materials to be used. Mention shall be made of any substance that may ̳disappear‘ in the course of processing.
(d) a statement of the expected final yield with the acceptable limits, and of relevant intermediate yields, where applicable.
(e) a statement of the processing location and the principal equipment to be used.
(f) the methods, or reference to the methods, to be used for preparing the critical equipments including cleaning, assembling, calibrating, sterilizing;
(g) detailed stepwise processing instructions and the time taken for each step;
(h) the instructions for in-process control with their limits;
(i) the requirements for storage conditions of the products, including the container, labelling and special storage conditions where applicable;
(j) any special precautions to be observed;
(k) packing details and specimen labels.

19. Packing Records:

There shall be authorised packaging instructions for each product, pack size and type.
These shall include or have a reference to the following: -

(a) name of the product;

(b) description of the dosage form, strength and composition;
(c) the pack size expressed in terms of the number of doses, weight or volume of the product in the final container;
(d) complete list of all the packaging materials required for a standard batch size, including quantities, sizes and types with the code or reference number relating to the specifications of each packaging material.;
(e) reproduction of the relevant printed packaging materials and specimens indicating where batch number and expiry date of the product have been applied;
(f) special precautions to be observed, including a careful examination of the area and equipment in order to ascertain the line clearance before the operations begin.
(g) description of the packaging operation, including any significant subsidiary operations and equipment to be used;
(h) details of in-process controls with instructions for sampling and acceptance; and (i) upon completion of the packing and labelling operation, a reconciliation shall be made between number of labelling and packaging units issued, number of units labelled, packed and excess returned or destroyed. Any significant or unusual discrepancy in the numbers shall be carefully investigated before releasing the final batch.

20. Batch Packaging Records:

20.1 A batch packaging record shall be kept for each batch or part batch processed. It shall be based on the relevant parts of the packaging instructions, and the method of preparation of such records shall be designed to avoid transcription errors.

20.2 Before any packaging operation begins, check shall be made and recorded that the equipment and the work stations are clear of the previous products, documents or materials not required for the planned packaging operations, and that the equipment is clean and suitable for use.

21. Batch Processing Records

21.1 There shall be Batch Processing Record for each product. It shall be based on the relevant parts of the currently approved Master Formula. The method of preparation of such records included in the Master Formula shall be designed to avoid transcription errors.

21.2 Before any processing begins, check shall be performed and recorded to ensure that the equipment and work station are clear of previous products, documents or materials not required for the planned process are removed and the equipment is clean and suitable for use.
21.3 During processing, the following information shall be recorded at the time each action is taken and the record shall be dt. and signed by the person responsible for the processing operations: -

(a) the name of the product, (b) the number of the batch being manufactured, (c) dates and time of commencement, of significant intermediate stages and of completion of production, (d) initials of the operator of different significant steps of production and where appropriate, of the person who checked each of these operations, (e) the batch number and/or analytical control number as well as the quantities of each starting material actually weighed, (f) any relevant processing operation or event and major equipment used, (g) a record of the in-process controls and the initials of the person(s) carrying them out, and the results obtained,

(h) the amount of product obtained after different and critical stages of manufacture (yield), (i) comments or explanations for significant deviations from the expected yield limits shall be given, (j) notes on special problems including details, with signed authorization, for any deviation from the Master Formula, (k) addition of any recovered or reprocessed material with reference to recovery or reprocessing stages.

22. Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and Records, regarding:

22.1 Receipt of materials:

22.1.1 There shall be written Standard Operating Procedures and records for the receipt of each delivery of raw, primary and printed packaging material.

22.1.2 The records of the receipts shall include;

(a) the name of the material on the delivery note and the number of containers;
(b) the date of receipt;
(c) the manufacturer‘s and/ or supplier‘s name;
(d) the manufacturer‘s batch or reference number;
(e) the total quantity, and number of containers, quantity in each container received;
(f) the control reference number assigned after receipt;
(g) any other relevant comment or information.

22.1.3 There shall be written standard operating procedures for the internal labelling, quarantine and storage of starting materials, packaging materials and other materials, as appropriate.

22.1.4 There shall be Standard Operating Procedures available for each instrument and equipment and these shall be placed in close proximity to the related instrument and equipment.

22.2 Sampling:

22.2.1 There shall be written Standard Operating Procedures for sampling which include the person(s) authorized to take the samples.

22.2.2 The sampling instructions shall include:

(a) the method of sampling and the sampling plan, (b) the equipment to be used, (c) any precautions to be observed to avoid contamination of the material or any deterioration in its quality, (d) the quantity of samples to be taken, (e) instructions for any required sub-division or pooling of the samples, (f) the types of sample container to be used, (g) any specific precautions to be observed, especially in regard to sampling of sterile and hazardous materials.

22.3. Batch Numbering:

22.3.1 There shall be Standard Operating Procedures describing the details of the batch

(lot) numbering set up with the objective of ensuring that each batch of intermediate, bulk or finished product is identified with a specific batch number.

22.3.2 Batch numbering Standard Operating Procedures applied to a processing stage and to the respective packaging stage shall be same or traceable to demonstrate that they belong to one homogenous mix.

22.3.3 Batch number allocation shall be immediately recorded in a logbook or by electronic data processing system. The record shall include date of allocation, product identity and size of batch.

22.4. Testing:

22.4.1 There shall be written procedures for testing materials and products at different stages of manufacture, describing the methods and equipment to be used. The tests performed shall be recorded.

22.5 Records of analysis:

22.5.1 The records shall include the following data:

(a) name of the material or product and the dosage form, (b) batch number and, where appropriate the manufacturer and/ or supplier, (c) references to the relevant specifications and testing procedures, (d) test results, including observations and calculations, and reference to any specifications (limits), (e) dates of testing, (f) initials of the persons who performed the testing, (g) initials of the persons who verified the testing and the detailed calculations, (h) a statement of release or rejection, and (i) signature and date of the designated responsible person.

22.5.2 There shall be written standard operating procedures and the associated records of actions taken for:

(a) equipment assembly and validation (b) analytical apparatus and calibration, (c) maintenance, cleaning and sanitation;
(d) personnel matters including qualification, training, clothing, hygiene;
(e) environmental monitoring;
(f) pest control;
(g) complaints;
(h) recalls made; and (i) returns received.

23. Reference Samples:-

23.1 Each lot of every active ingredient, in a quantity sufficient to carry out all the tests, except sterility and pyrogens/Bacterial Endotoxin Test, shall be retained for a period of 3 months after the date of expiry of the last batch produced from that active ingredient.

23.2.
Samples of finished formulations shall be stored in the same or simulated containers in which the drug has been actually marketed.

24. Reprocessing and Recoveries:

24.1.
Where reprocessing is necessary, written procedures shall be established and approved by the Quality Assurance Department that shall specify the conditions and limitations of repeating chemical reactions. Such reprocessing shall be validt..

24.2.
If the product batch has to be reprocessed, the procedure shall be authorized and recorded. An investigation shall be carried out into the causes necessitating re- processing and appropriate corrective measures shall be taken for prevention of recurrence. Re-processed batch shall be subjected to stability evaluation.

24.3.
Recovery of the product residue may be carried out, if permitted, in the master production and control records by incorporating it in subsequent batches of the product.

25. Distribution records:

25.1.
Prior to distribution or dispatch of given batch of a drug, it shall be ensured that the batch has been duly tested, approved and released by the quality control personnel. Pre-dispatch inspection shall be performed on each consignment on a random basis to ensure that only the correct goods are dispatched. Detailed instructions for warehousing and stocking of Large Volume Parenterals, if stocked, shall be in existence and shall be complied with after the batch is released for distribution. Periodic audits of warehousing practices followed at distribution centers shall be carried out and records thereof shall be maintained. Standard Operating Procedures shall be developed for warehousing of products.

25.2.
Records for distribution shall be maintained in a manner 1[so as] to facilitate prompt and complete recall of the batch, if and when necessary.

26. Validation and process validation:

26.1.
Validation studies shall be an essential part of Good Manufacturing Practices and shall be conducted as per the pre-defined protocols. These shall include validation of processing, testing and cleaning procedures.
26.2.
A written report summarizing recorded results and conclusions shall be prepared, documented and maintained.

26.3.
Processes and procedures shall be established on the basis of validation study and undergo periodic revalidation to ensure that they remain capable of achieving the intended results. Critical processes shall be validt., prospectively or retrospectively.

26.4.
When any new Master Formula or method of preparation is adopted, steps shall be taken to demonstrate its suitability for routine processing. The defined process, using the materials and equipment specified shall be demonstrated to yield a product consistently of the required quality.

26.5.
Significant changes to the manufacturing process, including any change in equipment or materials that may affect product quality and/or the reproducibility of the process, shall be validt..

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 431(E), dt. 30.6.2005. for ― such that finished batch of a drug can be traced to the retail level‖.

27. Product Recalls:

27.1 A prompt and effective product recall system of defective products shall be devised for timely information of all concerned stockists, wholesalers, suppliers, upto the retail level within the shortest period. The licensee may make use of both print and electronic media in this regard.

27.2.
There shall be an established written procedure in the form of Standard Operating Procedure for effective recall of products distributed by the licensee. Recall operations shall be capable of being initiated promptly so as to effectively reach at the level of each distribution channel.

27.3 The distribution records shall be readily made available to the persons designated for recalls.

27.4 The designated person shall record a final report issued, including reconciliation between the delivered and the recovered quantities of the products.

27.5 The effectiveness of the arrangements for recalls shall be evaluated from time to time.

27.6 The recalled products shall be stored separately in a secured segregated area pending final decision on them.

28. Complaints and Adverse Reactions:.

28.1 All complaints thereof concerning product quality shall be carefully reviewed and recorded according to written procedures. Each complaint shall be investigated/evaluated by the designated personnel of the company and records of investigation and remedial action taken thereof shall be maintained.

28.2.
Reports of serious adverse drug reactions resulting from the use of a drug along with comments and documents shall be forthwith reported to the concerned licensing authority.

28.3 There shall be written procedures describing the action to be taken, recall to be made of the defective product.

29. Site Master File. –The licensee shall prepare a succinct document in the form of ̳Site Master File‘ containing specific and factual Good Manufacturing Practices about the production and/or control of pharmaceutical manufacturing preparations carried out at the licensed premises. It shall contain the following: -

29.1 General information:

(a) brief information of the firm;
(b) pharmaceutical manufacturing activities as permitted by the licensing authority;
(c) other manufacturing activities, if any, carried out on the premises;
(d) type of products licensed for manufacture with flow charts mentioning procedure and process flow;
(e) number of employees engaged in the production, quality control, storage and distribution;
(f) use of outside scientific, analytical or other technical assistance in relation to manufacture and analysis;
(g) short description of the Quality Management System of the firm; and (h) products details registered with foreign countries.

29.2 Personnel:

(a) organisational chart showing the arrangement for quality assurance including production and quality control;
(b) qualification, experience and responsibilities of key personnel;

(c) outline for arrangements for basic and in-service training and how the records are maintained;
(d) health requirements for personnel engaged in production; and (e) personnel hygiene requirements, including clothing.

29.3 Premises:

(a) simple plan or description of manufacturing areas drawn to scale;
(b) nature of construction and fixtures/fittings;
(c) brief description of ventilation systems. More details should be given for critical areas with potential risk of airborne contamination (schematic drawing of systems). Classification of the rooms used for the manufacture of sterile products should be mentioned;
(d) special areas for the handling of the highly toxic, hazardous and sensitizing materials;
(e) brief description of water system (schematic drawings of systems), including sanitation;
(f) description of planned preventive maintenance programs for premises and of the recording system.

29.4 Equipment:

(a) brief description of major equipment used in production and Quality Control Laboratories (a list of equipment required);
(b) description of planned preventive maintenance programs for equipment and of the recording system; and (c) qualification and calibration including the recording systems and arrangements for computerized systems validation.

29.5 Sanitation:
(a) availability of written specifications and procedures for cleaning manufacturing areas and equipment.

29.6 Documentation. -

(a) arrangements for the preparation, revision and distribution of;
(b) necessary documentation for the manufacture;
(c) any other documentation related to product quality that is not mentioned elsewhere (e.g. microbiological controls about air and water).

29.7 Production:.

(a) brief description of production operations using, wherever possible, flow sheets and charts specifying important parameters;
(b) arrangements for the handling of starting materials, packaging materials, bulk and

finished products, including sampling, quarantine, release and storage;
(c) arrangements for the handling of rejected materials and products;
(d) brief description of general policy for process validation.

29.8 Quality Control:

(a) description of the quality control system and of the activities of the Quality Control Department. Procedures for the release of the finished products.

29.9 Loan licence manufacture and licensee:

(a) description of the way in which compliance of Good Manufacturing Practices by the loan licensee shall be assessed.

29.10 Distribution, complaints and product recall:

(a) arrangements and recording system for distribution;
(b) arrangements for the handling of complaints and product recalls.

29.11 Self inspection. -

(a) short description of the self-inspection system indicating whether an outside, independent and experienced external expert was involved in evaluating the manufacturer‘s compliance with Good manufacturing Practices in all aspects of production.

29.12 Export of drugs. -

(a) products exported to different countries;
(b) complaints and product recall, if any.

PART IA

SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURE OF STERILE PRODUCTS, PARENTERAL PREPARATIONS (SMALL VOLUME INJECTABLES AND LARGE VOLUME PARENTERALS) AND STERILE OPHTHALMIC PREPARATIONS.

Note. - The general requirements as given in Part 1 of this Schedule relating to Requirements of Good Manufacturing Practices for Premises and Materials for pharmaceutical products shall be complied with, mutatis mutandis, for the manufacture of sterile products, Parenteral preparations (Small Volume Injectables and Large Volume Parenterals) and Sterile Ophthalmic Preparations. In addition to these requirements, the following specific requirements shall also be followed, namely: -

1. General :
Sterile products, being very critical and sensitive in nature, a very high degree of precautions, prevention and preparations are needed. Dampness, dirt and darkness are to be avoided to ensure aseptic conditions in all areas. There shall be strict compliance in the prescribed standards especially in the matter of supply of water, air, active materials and in the maintenance of hygienic environment.

2. Buildings and Civil Works:

2.1 The buildings shall be built on proper foundation with standardized materials to avoid cracks in critical areas like aseptic solution preparation, filling and sealing rooms.

2.2 Location of services like water, steam, gases etc. shall be such that their servicing or repair shall not pose any threat to the integrity of the facility. Water lines shall not pose any threat of leakage to aseptic area.

2.3. The manufacturing areas shall be clearly separated into support areas (e.g.
washing and component preparation areas, storage areas etc.), preparation areas (e.g. bulk manufacturing area, non-aseptic blending areas etc.) change areas and aseptic areas.
Operations like removal of outer cardboard wrappings of primary packaging materials shall be done in the de-cartoning areas which are segregated from the washing areas. Wooden pallets, fiber board drums, cardboard and other particle shedding materials shall not be taken inside the preparation areas.

2.4. In aseptic areas –

(a) walls, floors and ceiling should be impervious, non-shedding, non-flaking and non-cracking. Flooring should be unbroken and provided with a cove both at the junction between the wall and the floor as well as the wall and the ceiling.

(b) walls shall be flat, and ledges and recesses shall be avoided. Wherever other surfaces join the wall (e,g, sterilizers, electric sockets, gas points etc.) these shall flush the walls. Walls shall be provided with a cove at the joint between the ceiling and the floor;

(c) ceiling shall be solid and joints shall be sealed. Light-fittings and air-grills shall flush with the walls and not hanging from the ceiling, so as to prevent contamination;

(d) there shall be no sinks and drains in Grade A and Grade B areas;

(e) doors shall be made of non-shedding material. These may be made preferably of Aluminium or Steel material. Wooden doors shall not be used. Doors shall open towards the higher-pressure area so that they close automatically due to air pressure;

(f) Windows shall be made of similar material as the doors, preferably with double panel and shall be flush with the walls. If fire escapes are to be provided, these shall be suitably fastened to the walls without any gaps;

(g) The furniture used shall be smooth, washable and made of stainless steel or any other appropriate material other than wood.

2.5. The manufacturing and support areas shall have the same quality of civil structure described above for aseptic areas, except the environmental standards which may vary in the critical areas.

2.6 Change rooms with entrance in the form of air-locks shall be provided before entry into the sterile product manufacturing areas and then to the aseptic area. Separate exit space from the aseptic areas is advisable. Change rooms to the aseptic areas shall be clearly demarcated into ̳black‘. ̳grey‘, and ̳white rooms‘ with different levels of activity and air cleanliness. The ̳black‘ change room shall be provided with a hand-washing sink. The sink

and its drain in the un-classified (first) change rooms may be kept clean all the time. The specially designed drain shall be periodically monitored to avoid presence of pathogenic micro-organisms.
Change room doors shall not be opened simultaneously. An appropriate inter-locking system and a visual and/or audible warning system may be installed to prevent the opening of more than one door at a time.

2.7. For communication between aseptic areas and non-aseptic areas, intercom telephones or speak-phones shall be used. These shall be minimum in number.

2.8 Material transfer between aseptic areas and outside shall be through suitable airlocks or pass-boxes. Doors of such airlocks and pass-boxes shall have suitable interlocking arrangements.

2.9. Personal welfare areas like rest rooms, tea room, canteen and toilets shall be outside and separated from the sterile product manufacturing area.

2.10 Animal houses shall be away from the sterile product manufacturing area and shall not share a common entrance or air handling system with the manufacturing area.

3. Air Handling System (Central Air-Conditioning):

3.1 Air Handling Units for sterile product manufacturing areas shall be different from those for other areas. Critical areas, such as the aseptic filling area, sterilized components unloading area and change room conforming to Grades B, C and D respectively shall have separate air handling units. The filter configuration in the air handling system shall be suitably designed to achieve the Grade of air as given in Table1. Typical operational activities for clean areas are highlighted in Table II and Table III.

3.2 For products which are filled aseptically, the filling room shall meet Grade B conditions at rest unmanned. This condition shall also be obtained within a period of about 30 minutes of the personnel leaving the room after completion of operations.

3.3. The filling operations shall take place under Grade A conditions which shall be demonstrated under working of simulated conditions which shall be achieved by providing laminar air flow work stations with suitable HEPA filters or isolator technology.

3.4. For products, which are terminally sterilized, the filling room shall meet Grade C conditions at rest. This condition shall be obtainable within a period of about 30 minutes of the personnel leaving the room after completion of operations.

3.5. Manufacturing and component preparation areas shall meet Grade C conditions.

3.6. After completion of preparation, washed components and vessels shall be protected with 1[Grade D background and should be handled in such a way that they are not recontaminated].

3.7. The minimum air changes for Grade B and Grade C areas shall not be less than 20 air changes per hour in a room with good air flow pattern and appropriate HEPA filters. For Grade A laminar air flow work stations, the air flow rate shall be 0.3 meter per second ± 20% (for vertical flows) and 0.45 meter per second ± 20% (for horizontal flows).

3.8. Differential pressure between areas of different environmental standards shall be at least 15 Pascal (0.06 inches or 1.5 mm water gauge). Suitable manometers or gauges shall be installed to measure and verify pressure differential.

3.9 The final change room shall have the same class of air as specified for the aseptic area. The pressure differentials in the change rooms shall be in the descending order from ̳white‘ to ̳black‘.

3.10 Unless there are product specific requirements, temperature and humidity in the aseptic areas 1[shall be 27 ± 2 degree centigrade and relative humidity 55% ± 5, respectively].
1[TABLE I

AIR BORNE PARTICULATE CLASSIFICATION FOR MANUFACTURE
OF STERILE PRODUCTS

Grade Maximum number of permitted particles per cubic metre equal t to or above At rest (b) In operation (a)
0.5μm 5μm
0.5μm 5μm A

B (a)

3,50,000 2,000 C (a) 350,000 2,000 35,00,000 20,000 D (a) 35,00,000 20,000 Not defined (c) Not defined (c)]

Notes :

(a) In order to reach the B, C and D air grades, the number of air changes shall be related to the size of the room and the equipment and personnel present in the room. The air system shall be provided with the appropriate filters such as HEPA for Grades A, B and C. The maximum permitted number of particles in the ―at rest‖ condition shall approximately be as under:

1[Grade A and B corresponds with class 100 or M 3.5 or class 5]; Grade C with Class 10,000 or M 5.5 or ISO Class 7; Grade D with Class 1,00,000 or M 6.5 or ISO Class 8.

(b) The requirement and limit for the area shall depend on the nature of the operation carried out.

(c) Type of operations to be carried out in the various grades are given in Table II and Table III as under:

TABLE II

TYPES OF OPERATIONS TO BE CARRIED OUT IN THE VARIOUS
GRADES FOR ASEPTIC PREPARATIONS

Grade Types of operations for aseptic preparations A Aseptic preparation and filling B Background room conditions for activities requiring Grade A C Preparation of solution to be filtered D Handling of components after washing

TABLE III

TYPES OF OPERATIONS TO BE CARRIED OUT IN THE VARIOUS
GRADES FOR TERMINALLY STERILIZED PRODUCTS

Grade Types of operations for terminally sterilized products.
A Filling of products, which are usually at risk.
C Placement of filling and sealing machines, preparation of solutions when 1[unusually at risk]. Filling of product when unusually at risk.
D Moulding, blowing (pre-forming) operations of plastic containers, preparations of solutions and components for subsequent filling.

4. Environmental Monitoring:

4.1 All environmental parameters listed under para 3.1 to 3.10 shall be verified and established at the time of installation and thereafter monitored at periodic intervals. The recommended frequencies of periodic monitoring shall be as follows :-

(a) Particulate monitoring in air – 6 Monthly.
(b) HEPA filter integrity testing (smoke testing) – Yearly (c) Air change rates – 6 Monthly.
(d) Air pressure differentials – Daily.
(e) Temperature and humidity – Daily (f) Microbiological monitoring by settle plates and/or swabs in aseptic areas– Daily, and at decreased frequency in other areas.

`Note: The above frequencies of monitoring shall be changed as per the requirements and load in individual cases.

4.2 There shall be a written environmental monitoring program and microbiological results shall be recorded. Recommended limits for microbiological monitoring of clean areas ―in operation‖ are as given in the table below:

TABLE

RECOMMENDED LIMITS FOR MICROBIOLOGICAL MONITORING OF CLEAN AREAS ― IN OPERATION‖

Grade Air sample Cfu/m2 Settle plates (dia. 90mm.
Cfu/2 hrs.
Contact plates (dia. 55mm) cfu per plate Glove points (five fingers) cfu per glove A < 1 < 1 < 1 < 1 B

C

-- D

--

Notes:

(a) These are average values.
(b) Individual settle plates may be exposed for not less than two hours in Grade B, C and D areas and for not less than thirty minutes in Grade A area.

4.3 Appropriate action shall be taken immediately if the result of particulate and microbiological monitoring indicates that the counts exceed the limits. The Standard Operating Procedures shall contain corrective action. After major engineering modification to the HVAC system of any area, all monitoring shall be re-performed before production commences.

5. Garments.

5.1 This section covers garments required for use by personnel working only in aseptic area. Outdoor clothing shall not be brought into the sterile areas.

5,2 The garments shall be made of non-shedding and tight weave material.
Cotton garments shall not be used. The garments shall shed virtually no fibres or particulate matter.

5.3 The clothing and its quality shall be adopted to the process and the work place and worn in such a way as to protect the product from contamination. Garments shall be single piece with fastenings at cuffs, neck and at legs to ensure close fit. Trouser legs shall be tucked inside the cover boots. Suitable design of garments shall either include a hood (headcover) or a separate hood which can be tucked inside the over-all. Pockets, pleats and belts shall be avoided in garments. Zips (if any) shall be of plastic material. Garments with damaged zips shall not be used.

5.4. Only clean, sterilized and protective garments shall be used at each work session where aseptic filtration and filling operations are undertaken and at each work shift for products intended to be sterilized, post-filling. The mask and gloves shall be changed at every work session in both instances.

5.5 Gloves shall be made of latex or other suitable plastic materials and shall be powder-free. These shall be long enough to cover wrists completely and allow the over-all cuff to be tucked in.

5.6. The footwear shall be of suitable plastic or rubber material and shall be daily cleaned with a bactericide.

5.7. Safety goggles or numbered glasses with side extension shall be used inside aseptic areas. These shall be sanitized by a suitable method.

5.8. Garment changing procedures shall be documented and operators trained in this respect. A full size mirror shall be provided in the final change room for the operator to verify that he is appropriately attired in the garments. Periodic inspection of the garments shall be done by responsible staff.

6. Sanitation:

6.1. There shall be written procedures for the sanitation of sterile processing facilities. Employees carrying out sanitation of aseptic areas shall be trained specifically for this purpose.

6.2. Different sanitizing agent shall be used in rotation and the concentrations of the same shall be as per the recommendations of the manufacturer. Records of rotational use of sanitizing agents shall be maintained.

6.3. Distilled water freshly collected directly from the distilled water plant or water maintained above 70 degree centigrade from the re-circulation loop shall be used for dilution of disinfectants. Alternatively, distilled water sterilized by autoclaving or membrane filtration shall be used. The dilution shall be carried out in the ̳white‘ change room.

6.4. 1[Where alcohol or isopropyl alcohol is used for dilution of disinfectants for use as hand sprays, the preparation of the same shall be done in the bulk preparation area in grade C.]

6.5. Diluted disinfectants shall bear the label ̳use before‘, based on microbiological establishment of the germicidal properties. The solutions shall be adequately labelled and documents maintained.

6.6. Formaldehyde or any other equally effective fumigant is recommended for the fumigation of aseptic areas or after major civil modifications. There shall be Standard Operating Procedures for this purpose. Its use for routine purpose shall be discouraged and an equally effective surface cleaning regime shall be followed.

6.7. Cleaning of sterile processing facilities shall be undertaken with air suction devices or with non-linting sponges or clothes.

6.8. Air particulate quality shall be evaluated on a regular basis and record maintained.

7. Equipment:

7.1 The special equipment required for manufacturing sterile products includes component washing machines, steam sterilizers, dry heat sterilizers, membrane filter assemblies, manufacturing vessels, blenders, liquid filling machines, powder filling machines, sealing and labelling machines, vacuum testing chambers, inspection machines, lyophilisers, pressure vessels etc. Suitable and fully integrated washing sterilizing filling lines may be provided, depending upon the type and volume of activity.

7.2. Unit-sterilizers shall be double-ended with suitable inter-locking arrangements between the doors. The effectiveness of the sterilization process shall be established initially by biological inactivation studies using microbial spore indicators and then at least once a year by carrying out thermal mapping of the chamber. Various sterilization parameters shall be established based on these studies and documented. For membrane filters used for filtration, appropriate filter integrity tests that ensure sterilization shall be carried out before and after filtration.

7.3. Filling machines shall be challenged initially and then at periodic intervals by simulation trials including sterile media fill. Standard Operating Procedures and acceptance criteria for media fills shall be established, justified and documented. Special simulation trial procedures shall be developed, validt. and documented for special products like ophthalmic ointments.

7.4. The construction material used for the parts which are in direct contact with products and the manufacturing vessels may be stainless steel 316 or Boro-silicate glass (if glass containers) and the tubing shall be capable of being washed and autoclaved.

7.5 On procurement, installation qualification of each of the equipment shall be done by engineers with the support of production and quality assurance personnel. Equipment for critical processes like aseptic filling and sterilizers shall be suitably validt. according to a written program before putting them to use.

7.6. Standard Operating Procedures shall be available for each equipment for its calibration and operation and cleaning. Gauges and other measuring devices attached to equipment shall be calibrated at suitable intervals against a written program. Calibration status of equipment gauges shall be adequately documented and displayed.

8. Water and Steam Systems:

8.1. Potable water meeting microbiological specification of not more than 500 cfu/ml and indicating absence of individual pathogenic micro-organisms. Escherichia coli, Salmonella, Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa per 100 ml sample shall be used for the preparation of purified water.

8.2 Purified water prepared by de-mineralization shall meet the microbiological specification of not more than 100 cfu per ml and indicate absence of pathogenic microorganisms in 100 ml. Purified water shall also meet IP specification for chemical quality.
Purified water shall be used for hand washing in change rooms. Containers, closures and machine parts may be washed with potable water followed by suitably filtered purified water.
Purified water shall be stored in stainless steel tanks or plastic tanks.

8.3. Water for Injection (hereinafter as WFI) shall be prepared from potable water or purified water meeting the above specifications by distillation. Water for Injection shall meet microbiological specification of not more than 10 cfu per 100 ml. WFI shall also meet IP specification for Water for Injection and shall have an endotoxin level of not more than
0.25 EU/Ml. Bulk solutions of liquid parenterals shall be made in WFI. Final rinse of product containers and machine parts shall be done with WFI. Disinfectant solutions for use in aseptic areas shall be prepared in WFI.

8.4. Water for Injection for the manufacture of liquid injectables shall be freshly collected from the distillation plant or from a storage or circulation loop where the water has been kept at above 70 degree centigrade. At the point of collection, water may be cooled using suitable heat exchanger.

8.5 Water for non-injectable sterile products like eye drops shall meet IP specifications for purified water. In addition, microbiologial specification of not more than 10 cfu per 100 ml and absence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Enterobacter coli in 100 ml shall also be met.

8.6. Water for Injection shall be stored in steam jacketed stainless steel tanks of suitable size and the tanks shall have hydrophobic bacterial retention with 0.22 μ vent filters.
The filters shall be suitably sterilized at periodic intervals. The distribution lines for purified water and distilled water shall be of stainless steel 316 construction and shall not shed particles.

8.7. There shall be a written procedure and program for the sanitation of different water systems including storage tanks, distribution lines, pumps and other related equipment.
Records of sanitation shall be maintained.

8.8. There shall be written microbiological monitoring program for different types of water. The results shall justify the frequency of sampling and testing. Investigation shall be carried out and corrective action taken in case of deviation from prescribed limits.

1[8.9 Steam coming in contact with the product, primary containers and other product contact surfaces shall be sterile and pyrogen free.]

9. Manufacturing Process:

9.1. Manufacture of sterile products shall be carried out only in areas under defined conditions.

9.2. Bulk raw materials shall be monitored for bio-burden periodically. Bioburden of bulk solution prior to membrane filtration shall be monitored periodically and a limit of not more than 100 cfu per ml is recommended.

9.3 The time between the start of the preparation of the solution and its sterilization or filtration through a micro-organism retaining filter shall be minimized. There shall be a set maximum permissible time for each product that takes into account its composition and method of storage mentioned in the Master formula record.

9.4. Gases coming in contact with the sterile product shall be filtered through two
0.22 μ hydrophobic filters connected in-series. These filters shall be tested for integrity. Gas cylinders shall not be taken inside aseptic areas.

9.5. Washed containers shall be sterilized immediately before use. Sterilized containers, if not used within an established time, shall be rinsed with distilled or filtered purified water and re-sterilized.

9.6. Each lot of finished product shall be filled in one continuous operation. In each case, where one batch is filled in using more than one operation, each lot shall be tested separately for sterility and held separately till sterility test results are known.

9.7. Special care shall be exercised while filling products in powder form so as not to contaminate the environment during transfer of powder to filling machine-hopper.

10. Form-Fill-Seal Technology or Blow, Fill-Seal Technology:

10.1 Form-Fill-Seal units are specially built automated machines in which through one continuous operation, containers are formed from thermoplastic granules, filled and then sealed. Blow, fill-seal units are machines in which containers are moulded / blown (preformed) in separate clean rooms, by non-continuous operations.

Note:
(i) These shall be installed in at least Grade C environment.
(ii) These shall comply with the limits as recommended in Table at Item 4.2.

10.2. Form-Fill-Seal/Blow, Fill-Seal machines used for the manufacture of products for terminal sterilization shall be installed in at least Grade C environment and the filling zone within the machine shall fulfil Grade A requirements.

10.3. Terminally sterilized products.–

10.3.1. Preparation of primary packaging material such as glass bottles, ampoules and rubber stoppers shall be done in at least Grade D environment. Where there is unusual risk to the product from microbial contamination, the above operation shall be done in Grade C environment. All the processes used for component preparation shall be validt..

10.3.2. Filling of products requiring terminal sterilization shall be done under Grade A environment with a Grade C background.

10.4 Preparation of solutions, which are to be sterilized by filtration, shall be done in Grade C environment, and if not to be filtered, the preparation of materials and products shall be in a Grade A environment with Grade B in background.

10.5 Filtration (Membrane).-

(i) Solutions for Large Volume Parenterals shall be filtered through a non-fibre releasing, sterilizing grade cartridge/membrane filter of nominal pore size of 0.22 μ for aseptic filling whereas 0.45 μ porosity shall be used for terminally sterilized products.

(ii) A second filtration using another 0.22 μ sterilizing grade cartridge / membrane filter shall be performed immediately prior to filling. Process specifications shall indicate the maximum time during which a filtration system may be used with a view to precluding microbial build-up to levels that may affect the microbiological quality of the Large Volume Parenterals.

(iii) The integrity of the sterilized filter shall be verified and confirmed immediately after use by an appropriate method such as Bubble Point, Diffusive Flow or Pressure Hold Test.

10.6 Sterilization (Autoclaving).–

10.6.1. Before any sterilization process is adopted, its suitability for the product and its efficacy in achieving the desired sterilizing conditions in all parts of each type of load pattern to be processed, shall be demonstrated by physical measurements and by biological indicators, where appropriate.

10.6.2 All the sterilization process shall be appropriately validt.. The validity of the process shall be verified at regular intervals, but at least annually. Whenever significant modifications have been made to the equipment and product, records shall be maintained thereof.

10.6.3 The sterilizer shall be double ended to prevent mix-ups.

10.6.4 Periodic bio-burden monitoring of products before terminal sterilization shall be carried out and controlled to limits specified for the product in the Master Formula.

10.6.5 The use of biological indicators shall be considered as an additional method of monitoring the sterilization. These shall be stored and used according to the manufacturer‘s instructions. Their quality shall be checked by positive controls. If biological indicators used, strict precautions shall be taken to avoid transferring microbial contamination from them.

10.6.6 There shall be clear means of differentiating ̳ sterilized‘ and ̳un-sterilized‘ products. Each basket, tray or other carrier of products or components shall be clearly labelled with the name of the material, its batch number, and sterilization status. Indicators shall be used, where appropriate, to indicate whether a batch (or sub-batch) has passed through the sterilization process.

10.6.7 Sterilization records shall be available for each sterilization-run and may also include thermographs and sterilization monitoring strips. They shall be maintained as part of the batch release procedure.

10.7. Sterilization (By dry heat).–

10.7.1 Each heat sterilization cycle shall be recorded on a time/temperature chart of a suitable size by appropriate equipment of the required accuracy and precision. The position of temperature probes used for controlling and/or recording shall be determined during the validation and, where applicable, shall also be checked against a second independent temperature probe located in the same position. The chart shall form a part of the

batch record. Container mapping may also be carried out in the case of Large Volume Parenterals.

10.7.2 Chemical or biological indicators may also be used, but shall not take the place of physical validation.

10.7.3. Sufficient time shall be allowed for the load to reach the required temperature before measurement of sterilization time commences. This time shall be separately determined for each type of load to be processed.

10.7.4. After the high temperature phase of a heat sterilization cycle, precautions shall be taken against contamination of sterilized load during cooling. Any cooling fluid or gas in contact with the product shall be sterilized unless it can be shown that any leaking container would not be approved for use. Air inlet and outlets shall be provided with bacterial retaining filters.

10.7.5. The process used for sterilization by dry heat shall include air-circulation within the chamber and the maintenance of a positive pressure to prevent the entry of nonsterile air. Air inlets and outlets should be provided with micro-organism retaining filters.
Where this process of sterilization by dry heat is also intended to remove pyrogens, challenge tests using endotoxins would be required as part of the validation process.

10.8. Sterilization (By Moist Heat).-
10.8.1 Both the temperature and pressure shall be used to monitor the process.
Control instrumentation shall normally be independent of monitoring instrumentation and recording charts. Where automated control and monitoring systems are used for these applications, these shall be validt. to ensure that critical process requirements are met. System and cycle faults shall be registered by the system and observed by the operator. The reading of the independent temperature indicator shall be routinely checked against the chart-recorder during the sterilization period. For sterilizers fitted with a drain at the bottom of the chamber, it may also be necessary to record the temperature at this position throughout the sterilization period. There shall be frequent leak tests done on the chamber during the vacuum phase of the cycle.

10.8.2 The items to be sterilized, other than products in sealed containers, shall be wrapped in a material which allows removal of air and penetration of steam but which prevents re-contamination after sterilization. All parts of the load shall be in contact with the sterilizing agent at the required temperature for the required time.

10.8.3. No Large Volume Parenteral shall be subjected to steam sterilization cycle until it has been filled and sealed.

10.8.4 Care shall be taken to ensure that the steam used for sterilization is of a suitable quality and does not contain additives at a level which could cause contamination of the product or equipment.

10.9. Completion/finalisation of sterile products–

10.9.1. All unit operations and processes in the manufacture of a batch shall have a minimum time specified and the shortest validt. time shall be used from the start of a batch to its ultimate release for distribution.

10.9.2. Containers shall be closed by appropriately validt. methods. Containers closed by fusion e.g. glass or plastic ampoules shall be subjected to 100% integrity testing.
Samples of other containers shall be checked for integrity according to appropriate procedures.

10.9.3 Containers sealed under vacuum shall be tested for required vacuum conditions.

10.9.4 Filled containers of parenteral products shall be inspected individually for extraneous contamination or other defects. When inspection is done visually, it shall be done under suitably controlled conditions of illumination and background. Operators doing the inspection shall pass regular eye-sight checks with spectacles, if worn, and be allowed frequent rest from inspection. Where other methods of inspection are used, the process shall be validt. and the performance of the equipment checked at suitable intervals. Results shall be recorded.

11. Product Containers and Closures. –

11.1 All containers and closures intended for use shall comply with the pharmacopoeial and other specified requirements. Suitable samples sizes, specifications, test methods, cleaning procedures and sterilization procedures, shall be used to assure that containers, closures and other component parts of drug packages are suitable and are not reactive, additive, adsorptive or leachable or presents the risk of toxicity to an extent that significantly affects the quality or purity of the drug. No second hand or used containers and closures shall be used.

11.2 Plastic granules shall also comply with the pharmacopoeial requirements including physio-chemical and biological tests.

11.3. All containers and closures shall be rinsed prior to sterilization with Water for Injection according to written procedure.

11.4. The design of closures, containers and stoppers shall be such as to make cleaning, easy and also to make airtight seal when fitted to the bottles.

11.5 It shall be ensured that containers and closures chosen for a particular product are such that when coming into contact they are not absorbed into the product and they do not affect the product adversely. The closures and stoppers should be of such quality substances as not to affect the quality of the product and avoid the risk of toxicity.

11.6. Whenever glass bottles are used, the written schedule of cleaning shall be laid down and followed. Where bottles are not dried after washing, these shall be finally rinsed with distilled water or pyrogen free water, as the case may be, according to written procedure.

11.7. Individual containers of parenteral preparations, ophthalmic preparations shall be examined against black/white background fitted with diffused light after filling so as to ensure freedom from foreign matters.

11.8 Glass Bottles. –

11.8.1 Shape and design of the glass bottle shall be rational and standardized.
Glass bottles made of USP Type-I and USP Type-II glass shall only be used. Glass bottles shall not be reused. Before use, USP Type-II bottles shall be validt. for the absence of particulate matter generated over a period of the shelf -life of the product and shall be

regularly monitored after the production, following statistical sampling methods. USP TypeIII glass containers may be used for non-parenteral sterile products such as Otic Solutions.

11.9. Plastic Containers. –

11.9.1 Pre-formed plastic containers intended to be used for packing of Large Volume Parenteral shall be moulded in-house by one-continuous operation through an automatic machine.

11.9.2. Blowing, filling and sealing (plugging) operation shall be conducted in room(s) conforming to requirements as mentioned in Table III of Item 3.10. Entry to the area where such operations are undertaken, shall be through a series of airlocks. Blowers shall have an air supply which is filtered through 0.22μ filters. Removal of runners and plugging operations shall be conducted under a laminar airflow workstation.

11.10 Rubber Stoppers. –

11.10.1 The rubber stoppers used for Large Volume Parenterals shall comply with specifications prescribed in the current edition of the Indian Pharmacopoeia.

12. Documentation:

12.1 The manufacturing records relating to manufacture of sterile products shall indicate the following details:-

(1) Serial number of the Batch Manufacturing Record.
(2) Name of the product (3) Reference to Master Formula Record.
(4) Batch/Lot number (5) Batch/Lot size.
(6) Date of commencement of manufacture and date of completion of manufacture.
(7) Date of manufacture and assigned date of expiry.
(8) Date of each step in manufacturing.
(9) Names of all ingredients with the grade given by the quality control department.
(10) Quality of all ingredients.
(11) Control reference numbers for all ingredients.
(12) Time and duration of blending, mixing, etc. whenever applicable.
(13) pH of solution whenever applicable.
(14) Filter integrity testing records (15) Temperature and humidity records whenever applicable (16) Records of plate-counts whenever applicable.
(17) Results of pyrogen and/or bacterial endotoxin & toxicity.
(18) Records of weight or volume of drug filled in containers.
(19) Bulk sterility in case of aseptically filled products.
(20) Leak test records.
(21) Inspection records.
(22) Sterilization records including autoclave leakage test records, load details, date, duration, temperature, pressure, etc.
(23) Container washing records.
(24) Total number of containers filled.
(25) Total numbers of containers rejected at each stage (26) Theoretical yield, permissible yield, actual yield and variation thereof.
(27) Clarification for variation in yield beyond permissible yield.
(28) Reference numbers of relevant analytical reports.
(29) Details of reprocessing, if any.

(30) Name of all operators carrying out different activities.
(31) Environmental monitoring records.
(32) Specimens of printed packaging materials.
(33) Records of destruction of rejected containers and printed packaging materials.
(34) Signature of competent technical staff responsible for manufacture and testing.

Note:
(1) Products shall be released only after complete filling and testing.
(2) Result of the tests relating to sterility, pyrogens, and Bacterial endotoxins shall be maintained in the analytical records.
(3) Validation details and simulation trial records shall be maintained separately, (4) Records of environmental monitoring like temperature, humidity, microbilogical data, etc. shall be maintained. Records of periodic servicing of HEPA filters, sterilizers and other periodic maintenance of facilities and equipment carried out also be maintained.
(5) Separate facilities shall be provided for filling-cum-sealing of Small Volume Injectables and Large Volume Parenterals.
(6) It is advisable to provide separate facilities for manufacture of Large Volume Parenterals in glass containers and / or plastic containers.
(7) For manufacture of Large Volume Parenterals in plastic containers, it is advisable to instal automatic (with all operations) Form–FillSeal machines having one continuous operation.

PART IB

SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURE OF ORAL SOLID DOSAGE FORMS (TABLETS AND CAPSULES)

Note: - The General Requirements as given in Part 1 of this Schedule relating to requirements of Good Manufacturing Practices for Premises and materials for pharmaceutical products shall be complied with, mutatis mutandis, for the manufacture of oral Solid Dosage Forms (Tablets and Capsules). In addition to these requirements, the following Specific Requirement shall also be followed, namely :-

1. General:

1.1 The processing of dry materials and products creates problems of dust control and cross-contamination. Special attention is therefore, needed in the design, maintenance and use of premises and equipment in order to overcome these problems. Wherever required, enclosed dust control manufacturing systems shall be employed.

1.2. Suitable environmental conditions for the products handled shall be maintained by installation of air-conditioning wherever necessary. Effective air-extraction systems, with discharge points situated to avoid contamination of other products and processes shall be provided. Filters shall be installed to retain dust and protect the factory and local environment.

1.3. Special care shall be taken to protect against subsequent contamination of the product by particles of metal or wood. The use of metal detector is recommended.
Wooden equipment should be avoided. Screens, sieves, punches and dies shall be examined for wear and tear or for breakage before and after each use.

1.4. All ingredients for a dry product shall be sifted before use unless the quality of the input material can be assured. Such sifting shall normally be carried out at dedicated areas.

1.5. 1[Where the facilities are designed to provide special environmental conditions of pressure differentials between rooms, these conditions shall be regularly monitored and any deviation shall be brought to the immediate attention of the production and quality assurance departments].

1.6. Care shall be taken to guard against any material lodging and remaining undetected in any processing or packaging equipment. Particular care shall be taken to ensure that any vacuum, compressed air or air-extraction nozzles are kept clean and that there is no evidence of lubricants leaking into the product from any part of the equipments.

2. Sifting, Mixing and Granulation:

2.1. Unless operated as a closed system, mixing, sifting and blending equipments shall be fitted with dust extractors 1[or in a dedicated area for each operation].

2.2. Residues from sieving operations shall be examined periodically for evidence of the presence of unwanted materials.

2.3. Critical operating parameters like time and temperature for each mixing, blending and drying operation shall be specified in a Master Formula, monitored during processing, and recorded in the batch records.

2.4. Filter bags fitted to fluid-bed dryer shall not be used for different products, without being washed in-between use. With certain highly potent or sensitizing products, bags specific to one product only shall be used. Air entering the dryer shall be filtered. Steps shall be taken to prevent contamination of the site and local environment by dust in the air leaving the dryer due to close positioning of the air-inlets and exhaust.

2.5. Granulation and coating solutions shall be made, stored and used in a manner which minimizes the risk of contamination or microbial growth.

3. Compressions (Tablets):

3.1. Each tablet compressing machine shall be provided with effective dust control facilities to avoid cross-contamination. Unless the same product is being made on each machine, or unless the compression machine itself provides its own enclosed air controlled environment, the machine shall be installed in separate cubicles.

3.2. Suitable physical, procedural and labelling arrangements shall be made to prevent mix up of materials, granules and tablets on compression machinery.

3.3. Accurate and calibrated weighing equipment shall be readily available and used for in-process monitoring of tablet weight variation. Procedures used shall be capable of detecting out-of-limits tablets.

3.4. At the commencement of each compression run and in case of multiple compression points in a compression machine, sufficient individual tablets shall be examined at fixed intervals to ensure that a tablet from each compression station or from each compression point has been inspected for suitable pharmacopoeial parameters like ̳appearance‘, ̳weight variation‘, ̳disintegration‘, ̳hardness‘, ̳friability‘ and ̳thickness‘. The results shall be recorded as part of the batch documentation.

3.5. Tablets shall be de-dusted, preferably by automatic device and shall be monitored for the presence of foreign materials besides any other defects.

3.6. Tablets shall be collected into clean, labelled containers.

3.7. Rejected or discarded tablets shall be isolated in identified containers and their quantity recorded in the Batch Manufacturing Record.

3.8 In-process control shall be employed to ensure that the products remain within specification. During compression, samples of tablets shall be taken at regular intervals of not greater than 30 minutes to ensure that they are being produced in compliance with specified in-process specification. The tablets shall also be periodically checked for additional parameters such as ̳appearance‘, ̳weight variation‘, ̳disintegration‘, ̳hardness‘, ̳friability‘ and ̳thickness‘ and contamination by lubricating oil.

4. Coating (Tablets):

4.1. Air supplied to coating pans for drying purposes shall be filtered air and of suitable quality. The area shall be provided with suitable exhaust system and environmental control (temperature, humidity) measures.

4.2 Coating solutions and suspensions shall be made afresh and used in a manner, which shall minimize the risk of microbial growth. Their preparation and use shall be documented and recorded.

5. Filling of Hard Gelatin Capsule:

Empty capsules shells shall be regarded as ̳drug component‘ and treated accordingly.
They shall be stored under conditions which shall ensure their safety from the effects of excessive heat and moisture.

6. Printing (Tablets and Capsules)

6.1. Special care shall be taken to avoid product mix-up during any printing of tablets and capsules. Where different products, or different batches of the same product, are printed simultaneously, the operations shall adequately be segregated. Edible grade colours and suitable printing ink shall be used for such printing.

6.2. After printing, tablets and capsules shall be approved by Quality Control before release for packaging or sale.

7. Packaging (Strip and Blister):

7.1. Care shall be taken when using automatic tablet and capsule counting, strip and blister packaging equipment to ensure that all ̳rogue‘ tablets, capsules or foils from packaging operation are removed before a new packaging operation is commenced. There shall be an independent recorded check of the equipment before a new batch of tablets or capsules is handled.

7.2. Uncoated tablets shall be packed on equipment designed to minimize the risk of cross-contamination. Such packaging shall be carried out in an isolated area when potent tablets or Beta-Iactum containing tablets are being packed.

7.3. The strips coming out of the machine shall be inspected for defects such as misprint, cuts on the foil, missing tablets and improper sealing.

7.4. Integrity of individual packaging strips and blisters shall be subjected to vacuum test periodically to ensure leak proofness of each pocket strip and blister and records maintained.

PART IC

SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURE OF ORAL LIQUIDS (SYRUPS, ELIXIRS, EMULSIONS AND SUSPENSIONS)

Note: The General Requirements as given in Part I of this Schedule relating to Requirements of Good Manufacturing Practices for Premises and Materials for pharmaceutical products shall be complied with, mutatis mutandis, for the manufacture of (Syrups, Elixirs, Emulsions and Suspensions). In addition to these requirements, the following Specific Requirements shall also be followed, namely:-

1. Building and Equipment:.

1.1. The premises and equipment shall be designed, constructed and maintained to suit the manufacturing of Oral Liquids. The layout and design of the manufacturing area shall strive to minimize the risk of cross-contamination and mix-ups.

1.2. Manufacturing area shall have entry through double door airlock facility. It shall be made fly proof by use of ̳fly catcher‘ and/or ̳air curtain‘.

1.3. Drainage shall be of adequate size and have adequate traps, without open channels and the design shall be such as to prevent back flow. Drains shall be shallow to facilitate cleaning and disinfecting.

1.4. The production area shall be cleaned and sanitized at the end of every production process.

1.5. Tanks, containers, pipe work and pumps shall be designed and installed so that they can be easily cleaned and sanitized. Equipment design shall be such as to prevent accumulation of residual microbial growth or cross-contamination.

1.6. Stainless steel or any other appropriate material shall be used for parts of equipments coming in direct contact with the products. The use of glass apparatus shall be minimum.

1.7. Arrangements for cleaning of containers, closures and droppers shall be made with the help of suitable machines/devices equipped with the high pressure air, water and steam jets.

1.8. The furniture used shall be smooth, washable and made of stainless steel 1[or any other appropriate material which is scratch proof, washable and smooth].

2. Purified Water.

2.1. The chemical and microbiological quality of purified water used shall be specified and monitored routinely. The microbiological evaluation shall include testing for absence of pathogens and shall not exceed 100 cfu/ml (as per Appendix 12.5 of IP 1996.)

1. Added by G.S.R. 431(E), dt. 30.6.2005.

2.2. There shall be a written procedure for operation and maintenance of the purified water system. Care shall be taken to avoid the risk of microbial proliferation with appropriate methods like re-circulation, use of UV treatment, treatment with heat and sanitizing agent. After any chemical sanitisation of the water system, a flushing shall be done to ensure that the sanitizing agent has been effectively removed.

3. Manufacturing:
3.1. 1[Manufacturing personnel shall wear wherever required, non-fiber shedding clothing to prevent contamination of the products].

3.2. Materials likely to shed fibre like gunny bags, or wooden pallets shall not be carried into the area where products or cleaned-containers are exposed.

3.3. Care shall be taken to maintain the homogenecity of emulsion by use of appropriate emulsifier and suspensions by use of appropriate stirrer during filling. Mixing and filling processes shall be specified and monitored. Special care shall be taken at the beginning of the filling process, after stoppage due to any interruption and at the end of the process to ensure that the product is uniformly homogenous during the filling process.

3.4. The primary packaging area shall have an air supply which is filtered through 5 micron filters. The temperature of the area shall not exceed 30 degrees centigrade.

3.5. When the bulk product is not immediately packed, the maximum period of storage and storage conditions shall be specified in the Master Formula. The maximum period of storage time of a product in the bulk stage shall be validt..

PART ID

SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURE OF TOPICAL PRODUCTS , i.e. EXTERNAL PREPARATIONS (CREAMS, OINTMENTS, PASTES, EMULSIONS, LOTIONS, SOLUTIONS, DUSTING POWDERS AND IDENTICAL PRODUCTS)

Note: The General Requirements as given in Part I of this Schedule relating to Requirements of Good Manufacturing Practices for Premises and Materials for pharmaceutical products shall be complied with, mutatis mutandis, for the manufacture of Topical Products i.e. External preparations (Creams, Ointments, Pastes, Emulsions, Lotions, Solutions, Dusting powders and identical products used for external applications). In addition to these requirements, the following Specific Requirements shall also be followed, namely: -

1. The entrance to the area where topical products are manufactured shall be through a suitable airlock. Outside the airlock, insectocutors shall be installed.

2. The air to this manufacturing area shall be filtered through at least 20μ air filters and shall be air-conditioned. 2 [***].

3. The area shall be fitted with an exhaust system of suitable capacity to effectively remove vapours, fumes, smoke, floating dust particles.

4. The equipment used shall be designed and maintained to prevent the product from being accidentally contaminated with any foreign matter or lubricant.
5. 3[Suitable cleaning equipment and material] shall be used in the process of cleaning or drying the process equipment or accessories used.

2. The words ―The air shall be ventilated.‖ omitted by G.S.R. 431(E), dt. 30.6.2005.
3. Subs. by G.S.R. 431(E), dt. 30.6.2005, for ― no rags or dusters‖.

6. Water used in compounding shall be Purified Water IP.

7. Powders, wherever used, shall be suitably sieved before use.

8. Heating vehicles and a base like petroleum jelly shall be done in separate mixing area in suitable stainless steel vessels, using steam, gas, electricity, solar energy, etc.

9. A separate packing section may be provided for primary packaging of the products.

PART 1E

SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURE OF METERED-DOSE-INHALERS (MDI)

Note: The General Requirements as given in Part I of this Schedule relating to Requirements of Good Manufacturing Practices for Premises and Materials for pharmaceutical products shall be complied with, mutatis mutandis, for the manufacture of Metered-Dose-Inhalers (MDI). In addition to these requirements, the following Specific Requirements shall also be followed, namely: -

1. General:

Manufacture of Metered-Dose-Inhalers shall be done under conditions which shall ensure minimum microbial and particulate contamination. Assurance of the quality of components and the bulk product is very important. Where medicaments are in suspended state, uniformity of suspension shall be established.

2. Building and Civil Works:

2.1. The building shall be located on a solid foundation to reduce risk of cracking walls and floor due to the movement of equipment and machinery.

2.2 All building surfaces shall be impervious, smooth and non-shedding.
Flooring shall be continuous and provided with a cove between the floor and the wall as well as the wall to the ceiling. Ceiling shall be solid, continuous and covered to walls. Light fittings and air-grills shall be flush with the ceiling. All service lines requiring maintenance shall be erected in such a manner that these are accessible from outside the production area.

2.3. The manufacturing area shall be segregated into change rooms for personnel, container preparation area, bulk preparation and filling area, quarantine area and spray testing and packing areas.

2.4. Secondary change rooms shall be provided for operators to change from factory clothing to special departmental clothing before entering the manufacturing and filling area.

2.5. Separate area shall be provided for de-cartoning of components before they are air washed.

2.6. The propellants used for manufacture shall be delivered to the manufacturing area distribution system by filtering them through 2μ filters. The bulk containers of propellants shall be stored, suitably identified, away from the manufacturing facilities.

3. Environmental Conditions:

3.1. Where products or clean components are exposed, the area shall be supplied with filtered air of Grade C.

3.2. The requirements of temperature and humidity in the manufacturing area shall be decided depending on the type of product and propellants handled in the facility. Other support areas shall have comfort levels of temperature and humidity.

3.3. There shall be a difference in room pressure between the manufacturing area and the support areas and the differential pressure shall be not less than 15 Pascals (0.06 inches or 1.5 mm water gauge).

3.4. There shall be a written schedule for the monitoring of environmental conditions. Temperature and humidity shall be monitored daily.

4. Garments:

4.1. Personnel in the manufacturing and filling section shall wear suitable singlepiece-garment made out of non-shedding, tight weave material. Personnel in support areas shall wear clean factory uniforms.

4.2. Gloves made of suitable material having no interaction with the propellants shall be used by the operators in the manufacturing and filling areas. Preferably, disposable gloves shall be used.

4.3. Suitable department-specific personnel protective equipment like footwear and safety glasses shall be used wherever hazard exists.

5. Sanitation:

5.1. There shall be written procedures for the sanitation of the MDI manufacturing facility. Special care should be taken to handle residues and rinses of propellants.

5.2. Use of water for cleaning shall be restricted and controlled. Routinely used disinfectants are suitable for sanitizing the different areas. Records of sanitation shall be maintained.

6. Equipment:

6.1. Manufacturing equipment shall be of closed system. The vessels and supply lines shall be of stainless steel.

6.2. Suitable check weights, spray testing machines and labelling machines shall be provided in the department.

6.3. All the equipment shall be suitably calibrated and their performance validt.
on receipt and thereafter periodically.

7. Manufacture:

7.1. There shall be an approved Master Formula Records for the manufacture of metered dose inhalers. All propellants, liquids and gases shall be filtered through 2μ filters to remove particles.

7.2. The primary packing material shall be appropriately cleaned by compressed air suitably filtered through 0.2μ filter. The humidity of compressed air shall be controlled as applicable.

7.3. The valves shall be carefully handled and after de-cartoning, these shall be kept in clean, closed containers in the filling room.

7.4. For suspensions, the bulk shall be kept stirred continuously.

7.5. In-process controls shall include periodical checking of weight of bulk formulation filled in the containers. In a two-shot-filling process (liquid filling followed by gaseous filling), it shall be ensured that 100% check on weight is carried out.

7.6. Filled containers shall be quarantined for a suitable period established by the manufacturer to detect leaking containers prior to testing, labelling and packing.

8. Documentation8.1. In addition to the routine good manufacturing practices documentation, manufacturing records shall show the following additional information:-

(1) Temperature and humidity in the manufacturing area.
(2) Periodic filled weights of the formulation.
(3) Records of rejections during on-line check weighing.
(4) Records of rejection during spray testing.

PART 1F

SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS OF PREMISES, PLANT AND MATERIALS FOR MANUFACTURE OF ACTIVE PHARMACEUTIAL INGREDIENTS (BULK DRUGS)

Note: The General Requirements as given in Part I of this Schedule relating to Requirements of Good Manufacturing Practices for premises and Materials for pharmaceutical products shall be complied with, mutatis mutandis, for the manufacture of active pharmaceutical ingredients (Bulk Drugs). In addition to these requirements, the following Specific Requirements shall also be followed, namely: -

1. Building and Civil Works:

1.1. Apart from the building requirements contained in Part I, General ante, the active pharmaceutical ingredients facilities for manufacture of hazardous reactions, BetaLactum antibiotics. Steroids and Steroidal Hormones / Cytotoxic substances shall be provided in confined areas to prevent contamination of the other drugs manufactured.

1.2. The final stage of preparation of a drug, like isolation/filtration/drying/ milling / sieving and packing operations shall be provided with air filtration systems including pre-filters and finally with a 5 micron filter. Air handling systems with adequate number of air changes per hour or any other suitable system to control the air borne contamination shall be

provided. Humidity / Temperature shall also be controlled for all the operations wherever required.

1.3. Air filtration systems including pre-filters and particulate matter retention air filters shall be used, where appropriate, for air supplies to production areas. If air is recirculated to production areas, measures shall be taken to control re-circulation of floating dust particles from production. In areas where air contamination occurs during production, there shall be adequate exhaust system to control contaminants.

1.4. Ancillary area shall be provided for Boiler-house. Utility areas like heat exchangers, chilling workshop, store and supply of gases shall also be provided.

1.5. For specified preparation like manufacture of sterile products and for certain antibiotics, sex hormones, cytotoxic and oncology products, separate enclosed areas shall be designed. The requirements for the sterile active pharmaceutical ingredient shall be in line with the facilities required for formulation to be filled aseptically.

2. Sterile Products:

Sterile active pharmaceutical ingredient filled aseptically shall be treated as formulation from the stage wherever the process demands like crystallization, lyophilisation, filtration etc. All conditions applicable to formulations that are required to be filled aseptically shall apply mutatis mutandis for the manufacture of sterile active pharmaceutical ingredients involving stages like filtration, crystallization and lyophilisation.

3. Utilities / Services:

Equipment like chilling plant, boiler, heat exchangers, vacuum and gas storage vessels shall be serviced, cleaned, sanitized and maintained at appropriate intervals to prevent mal-functions or contamination that may interfere with safety, identity, strength, quality or purity of the drug product.

4. Equipment Design, Size and Location:

4.1. Equipment used in the manufacture, processing, packing or holding of an active pharmaceutical ingredient shall be of appropriate design, adequate size and suitably located to facilitate operations for its intended use and for its cleaning and maintenance.

4.2. If equipment is used for different intermediates and active pharmaceutical ingredients, proper cleaning before switching from one product to another becomes particularly important. If cleaning of a specific type of equipment is difficult, the equipment may need to be dedicated to a particular intermediate or active pharmaceutical ingredient.

4.3. The choice of cleaning methods, detergents and levels of cleaning shall be defined and justified. Selection of cleaning agents (e.g. solvents) should depend on :

(a) the suitability of the cleaning agent to remove residues of raw materials;
intermediates, precursors, degradation products and isomers, as appropriate.
(b) whether the cleaning agent leaves a residue itself;
(c) compatibility with equipment construction materials like centrifuge/ filtration, dryer/fluid bed dryer, rotocone proton dryer, vacuum dryer, frit mill, multi-mill/jet mills/sewetters cut sizing;
(d) test for absence of intermediate or active pharmaceutical ingredient in the final rinse.

4.4. Written procedures shall be established and followed for cleaning and maintenance of equipment, including utensils used in the manufacture, processing, packing or holding of active pharmaceutical ingredients. These procedures shall include but should not be limited to the following :

(a) assignment of responsibility for cleaning and maintaining equipment;
(b) maintenance and cleaning program schedules, including where appropriate, sanitizing schedules;
(c) a complete description of the methods and materials used to clean and maintain equipment, including instructions for de-assembling and reassembling each article of equipment to ensure proper cleaning and maintenance.;
(d) removal or obliteration of previous batch identification;
(e) protection of clean equipment from contamination prior to use;
(f) inspection of equipment for cleanliness immediately before use;
(g) establishing the maximum time that may elapse between completion of processing and equipment cleaning as well as between cleaning and equipment reuse.

4.5. Equipment shall be cleaned between successive batches to prevent contamination and carry-over of degraded material or contaminants unless otherwise established by validation.

4.6. As processing approaches the final purified active pharmaceutical ingredient, it is important to ensure that incidental carry over between batches does not have adverse impact on the established impurity profile. However, this does not generally hold good for any biological, active pharmaceutical ingredient where many of the processing steps are accomplished aseptically and where it is necessary to clean and sterilize equipment between batches.

5. In-Process Controls:
5.1.
In-process control for chemical reactions may include the following:
(a) reaction time or reaction completion;
(b) reaction mass appearance, clarity, completeness or pH solutions;
(c) reaction temperature;
(d) concentration of a reactant;
(e) assay or purity of the product;
(f) process completion check by TLC / any other means.
5.2.
In-process control for physical operations may include the following:
(a) appearance and colour;
(b) uniformity of the blend;
(c) temperature of a process;
(d) concentration of a solution;
(e) processing rate or time;
(f) particle size analysis;
(g) bulk/tap density;
(h) pH determination;
(i) moisture content.

6. Product Containers and Closures:

6.1. All containers and closures shall comply with the pharmacopoeial or any other requirement, suitable sampling methods, sample sizes, specifications, test methods, cleaning procedures and sterilization procedures, when indicated, shall be used to assure that containers, closures and other component parts of drug packages are suitable and are not reactive, additive, adsorptive or leachable to an extent that significantly affects the quality or purity of the drug.

6.2. The drug product container shall be tested or re-examined as appropriate and approved or rejected and shall be identified and controlled under a quarantine system designed to prevent their use in manufacturing or processing operations for which these are unsuitable.

6.3 Container closure system shall provide adequate protection against foreseeable external factors in storage / transportation and use that may cause deterioration or contamination of the active pharmaceutical ingredient.

6.4. Bulk containers and closures shall be cleaned and, where indicated by the nature of the active pharmaceutical ingredient, sterilized to ensure that they are suitable for their intended use.

6.5. The container shall be conspicuously marked with the name of the product and the following additional information concerning :

(a) quality and standards, if specified;
(b) manufacturing licence number/drug master file number (whichever applicable), batch number;
(c) date of manufacture and date of expiry;
(d) method for container disposal (label shall give the methodology, if required);
(e) storage conditions, if specified and name and address of the manufacturer, if available.

6.6. Areas for different operation of active pharmaceutical ingredients (bulk drugs) section shall have appropriate area which may be suitably partitioned for different operations.
PART II

REQUIREMENTS OF PLANT AND EQUIPMENT

1. External Preparations:

The following equipment is recommended for the manufacture of ̳External preparations‘ i.e. Ointments, Emulsion, Lotions, Solutions, Pastes, Creams, Dusting powders and such identical products used for external applications, whichever is applicable, namely :-

(1) 1[Mixing and storage tanks preferably of stainless steel or any other appropriate material].
(2) 2[Stainless steel container] (steam, gas or electrically heated).
(3) Mixer (electrically operated).
(4) Planetary mixer.
(5) A colloid mill or a suitable emulsifier.
(6) A triple roller mill or an ointment mill.

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 431(E), dt. 30.6.2005; for ―mixing and storage tanks (Stainless steel)‖.
2. Subs. by G.S.R. 431(E), dt. 30.6.2005; for ―Jacketted Kettle‖.

(7) Liquid filling equipment (electrically operated).
(8) Jar or tube filling equipment 1 [***]

Area. - (1) A minmum area of thirty square meters for basic installation and ten square meters for Ancillary area is recommended.

(2) Areas for formulations meant for external use and internal use shall be separately provided to avoid mix-up.
2[Note: The requirement for ancillary area in this part shall not apply to units registered before 1st January, 2002.]

2. Oral Liquid Preparations:

The following equipments are recommended for the manufacture of oral/internal use preparations i.e. Syrups, Elixirs, Emulsions and Suspensions, whichever is applicable, namely: -

(1) 3[Mixing and storage tanks preferably of Stainless steel or any other appropriate material].
(2) Jacketted Kettle / Stainless steel tank (steam, gas or electrically heated).
(3) Portable stirrer (electrically operated).
(4) A colloid mill or suitable emulsifier (electrically operated).
(5) Suitable filtration equipment (electrically operated).
(6) Semi-automatic/automatic bottle filling machine.
(7) Pilfer proof cap sealing machine.
(8) Water distillation unit or deionizer.
(9) Clarity testing inspection units.

Area. - A minimum area of thirty square meters for basic installation and ten square meters for Ancillary area is recommended.

2[Note: The requirement for ancillary area in this part shall not apply to units registered before 1st January, 2002.]

3. Tablets:

The Tableting section shall be free from dust and floating particles and may be airconditioned. For this purpose, each 4[tablet compression machine] shall be isolated into cubicles and connected to a vacuum dust collector or an exhaust system. For effective operations, the tablet production department shall be divided into four distinct and separate sections as follows: -

(a) Mixing, Granulation and Drying section.
(b) Tablet compression section.
(c) Packaging section (strip/blister machine wherever required).
(d) Coating section (wherever required).

3.1. The following electrically operated equipments are recommended for the manufacture of compressed tablets and hypodermic tablets, in each of the above sections, namely: -

(a) Granulation-cum-Drying section:

(1) Disintegrator and sifter.
(2) Powder mixer.
(3) Mass mixer/Planetary mixer/Rapid mixer granulator.

1. The word ̳electrically operated‘ Omitted by G.S.R. 431(E), dt. 30.6.2005.
2. Ins by G.S.R. 431(E), dt. 30.6.2005.
3 Subs. by G.S.R. 431(E), dt. 30.6.2005, for ―mixing and storage tanks (Stainless steel)‖.
4. Subs. by G.S.R. 431(E), dt. 30.6.2005, for ̳tablet machine‘.

(4) 1[Granulator wherever required].
(5) Thermostatically controlled hot air oven with trays (preferably mounted on a trolley)/Fluid bed dryer.
(6) Weighing machines.

(b) Compression section:

(1) Tablet compression machine, single/multi punch/rotatory.
(2) Punch and dies storage cabinets.
(3) Tablet de-duster (4) Tablet inspection unit/belt.
(5) 1[Dissolution test apparatus wherever required].
(6) In-process testing equipment like single pan electronic balance, hardness tester, friability and disintegration test apparatus.
(7) Air-conditioning and dehumidification arrangement (wherever necessary) (c) Packaging section:

(1) Strip/blister packaging machine.
(2) Leak test apparatus (vacuum system).
(3) Tablet counters (wherever applicable).
(4) Air-conditioning and dehumidification arrangement (wherever applicable).

Area. – A minimum area of sixty square meters for basic installation and twenty square meters for Ancillary area is recommended for un-coated tablets.
(d) Coating section:

(1) Jacketted kettle 2[stainless steel container or any other appropriate material] (steam, gas or electrically heated for preparing coating suspension).
(2) Coating pan (Stainless steel).
(3) Polishing pan (where applicable).
(4) Exhaust system (including vacuum dust collector).
(5) Air-conditioning and Dehumidification Arrangement.
(6) Weighing balance.
2[Note: The requirement for ancillary area in this part shall not apply to units registered before 1st January, 2002.]

3.2. The coating section shall be made dust free with suitable exhaust system to remove excess powder and fumes resulting from solvent evaporation. It shall be airconditioned and dehumidified wherever considered necessary.

Area. – A minimum additional area of thirty square meters for coating section for basic installation and ten square meters for Ancillary area is recommended.

Separate area and equipment for mixing, granulation, drying, tablet compression, coating and packing shall be provided for Penicillin group of drugs on the lines indicated above. In case of operations involving dust and floating particles, care shall be exercised to avoid cross-contamination.

2[Note: The requirement for ancillary area in this part shall not apply to units registered before 1st January, 2002.]

3.3. The manufacture of Hypodermic tablets shall be conducted under aseptic conditions in a separate air-conditioned room, the walls of which shall be smooth and washable. The granulation, tableting and packing shall be done in this room.

3.4.
The manufacture of effervescent and soluble 1 [***] tablets shall be carried out in airconditioned and dehumidified areas.

4. Powders:

The following equipment is recommended for the manufacture of powders, namely:-

(1) Disintegrator.
(2) Mixer (electrically operated).
(3) Sifter.
(4) Stainless steel vessels and scoops of suitable sizes.
(5) Filling equipment 1[***].
(6) Weighing balance.

In the case of operation involving floating particles of fine powder, suitable exhaust system shall be provided. Workers should be provided with suitable masks during operation.

Area. – A minimum area of thirty square meters is recommended to allow for the basic installations. Where the actual blending is to be done on the premises, an additional room shall be provided for the purpose.

2[Note: The requirement for additional room in this part shall not apply to units registered before 1st January, 2002.]

5. Capsules:

For the manufacture of capsules, separate enclosed area suitably air-conditioned and dehumidified with an airlock arrangement shall be provided. The following equipment is recommended for filling Hard Gelatin Capsules, namely: -

(1) Mixing and blending equipment (electrically or power driven).
(2) Capsules filling units 1[***].
(3) Capsules counters (wherever applicable).
(4) Weighing balance.
(5) Disintegration test apparatus.
(6) Capsule polishing equipment.

Separate equipment and, filling and packaging areas shall be provided in penicillin and non-penicillin sections. In case of operations involving floating particles of fine powder, a suitable exhaust system shall be provided. Manufacture and filling shall be carried out in airconditioned area. The room shall be dehumidified.

Area. –A minimum area of twenty-five square meters for basic installation and ten square meters for Ancillary area each for penicillin and non-penicillin sections is recommended.
2[Note: The requirement for ancillary area in this part shall not apply to units registered before 1st January, 2002.]

6. Surgical Dressing:

The following equipment is recommended for the manufacture of Surgical Dressings other than Absorbent Cotton Wool, namely:-

(1) Rolling machine.

(2) Trimming machine.
(3) Cutting equipment.
(4) Folding and pressing machine for gauze.
(5) Mixing tanks for processing medicated dressing.
(6) Hot air dry oven.
(7) Steam sterilizer or dry heat sterilizer or other suitable equipment.
(8) Work tables/benches for different operations.

Area. – A minimum area of thirty square meters is recommended to allow for the basic installations. In case medicated dressings are to be manufactured, another room with a minimum area of thirty square meters shall be provided.

7. Ophthalmic Preparations:.

For the manufacture of Ophthalmic preparations, separate enclosed areas with airlock arrangement shall be provided. The following equipment is recommended for the manufacture under aseptic conditions of Eye-Ointment, Eye-Lotions and other preparations for external use, namely:-

(1) Thermostatically controlled hot air ovens (preferably double ended).
(2) Jacketted kettle/stainless steel tanks (steam, gas or electrically heated).
(3) Mixing and storage tanks of stainless steel/Planetary mixer.
(4) Colloid mill or ointment mill.
(5) Tube filling and crimping equipment (semi-automatic or automatic filling machines).
(6) Tube cleaning equipment (air jet type).
(7) Tube washing and drying equipment, if required.
(8) Automatic vial washing machine.
(9) Vial drying oven.
(10) Rubber bung washing machine.
(11) Sintered glass funnel, Seitz filter and filter candle (preferably cartridge and membrane filters).
(12) Liquid filling equipment (semi-automatic or automatic filling machines).
(13) Autoclave (preferably ventilator autoclave).
(14) Air conditioning and dehumidification arrangement (preferably centrally airconditioned and dehumidification system).
(15) Laminar airflow units.

Area. – (1) A minimum area of twenty-five square meters for basic installation and ten square meters for Ancillary area is recommended. Manufacture and filling shall be carried out in air-conditioned areas under aseptic conditions. The rooms shall be further dehumidified as considered necessary if preparations containing antibiotics are manufactured.

(2) Areas for formulations meant for external use and internal use shall be separately provided to avoid mix up.
1[Note: The requirement for ancillary area in this Part shall not apply to units registered before 1st January, 2002.]

8. Pessaries and Suppositories:

(i) The following equipment is recommended for manufacture of Pessaries and Suppositories, namely: - (1) Mixing and pouring equipment (2) Moulding equipment.
(3) Weighing devices.

Area. – A minimum area of twenty square meters is recommended to allow for the basic installation.

(ii) In the case of pessaries manufactured by granulation and compression, the requirements as indicated under ―Item 3 of Tablet‖, shall be provided.

9. Inhalers and Vitrallae:

The following equipment is recommended for manufacture of inhalers and vitrallae, namely: -

(1) Mixing equipment.
(2) Graduated delivery equipment for measurement of the medicament during filling.
(3) Sealing equipment.

Area. – An area of minimum twenty square meters is recommended for the basic installations.

10. Repacking of drugs and pharmaceutical chemicals:

The following equipment is recommended for repacking of drugs and pharmaceuticals chemicals, namely:- (1) Powder disintegrator.
(2) Powder sifter (electrically operated).
(3) Stainless steel scoops and vessels of suitable sizes.
(4) Weighing and measuring equipment.
(5) Filling equipment (semi-automatic / automatic machines).
(6) Electric sealing machine.

Area. – An area of minimum thirty square metres is recommended for the basic installation. In case of operations involving floating particles of fine powder, a suitable exhaust system shall be provided.

11. Parenteral Preparations

The whole operation of manufacture of parenteral preparations (small volume injectables and large volume parenterals) in glass and plastic containers may be divided into the following separate areas/rooms, namely: -

11.1 Parenteral preparations in glass containers: –

(1) Water management area: This includes water treatment and storage.
(2) Containers and closures preparation area: This includes washing and drying of ampoules, vials, bottles and closures.
(3) Solution preparation area: This includes preparation and filtration of solution.
(4) Filling, capping and sealing area: This includes filling and sealing of ampoules and/or filling, capping and sealing of vials and bottles.
(5) Sterilization area (6) Quarantine area (7) Visual inspection area.
(8) Packaging area

The following equipment is recommended for different above-mentioned areas, namely: -

(a) Water management area:

(1) De-ionised water treatment unit.
(2) Distillation (multi-column with heat exchangers) unit.
(3) Thermostatically controlled water storage tank.
(4) Transfer pumps.
(5) Stainless steel service lines for carrying water into user areas.
(b) Containers and closures preparation area:
(1) Automatic rotary ampoule/vial/bottle washing machine having separate air, water distilled water jets.
(2) Automatic closures washing machine, (3) Storage equipment for ampoules, vials, bottles and closures.
(4) Dryer/sterilizer (double ended) (5) Dust proof storage cabinets.
(6) Stainless steel benches/stools.

(c) Solution preparation area:

(1) Solution preparation and mixing stainless steel tanks and other containers.
(2) Portable stirrer.
(3) Filtration equipment with cartridge and membrane filters/bacteriological filters.
(4) Transfer pumps.
(5) Stainless steel benches/stools

(d) Filling, capping and sealing area:

(1) Automatic ampoule/vial/bottle filling, sealing and capping machine under laminar air flow workstation.
(2) Gas lines (Nitrogen, Oxygen, Carbon dioxide) wherever required.
(3) Stainless steel benches / stools.

(e) Sterilization area:

(1) Steam sterilizer (preferably with computer control for sterilization cycle along with trolley sets for loading/unloading containers before and after sterilization).
(2) Hot air sterilizer (preferably double ended).
(3) Pressure leak test apparatus.

(f) Quarantine area. –

(1) Storage cabinets.
(2) Raised platforms/steel racks.
(g) Visual inspection area:

(1) Visual inspection units (preferably conveyor belt type and composite white and black assembly supported with illumination).
(2) Stainless steel benches/stools.

(h) Packaging area. -

(1) Batch coding machine (preferably automatic).

(2) Labelling unit (preferably conveyor belt type).
(3) Benches/stools.

Area. – (1) A minimum area of one hundred and fifty square meters for the basic installation and an Ancillary area of one hundred square meters for Small Volume Injectables is recommended. For Large Volume Parenterals, an area of one hundred and fifty square meters each for the basic installation and for Ancillary area is recommended. These areas shall be partitioned into suitable enclosures with airlock arrangements.

(2) Areas for formulations meant for external use and internal use shall be separately provided to avoid mix up.

(3) Packaging materials for large volume parenteral shall have a minimum area of 100 square meters.

1[Note: The requirement for ancillary area in this part shall not apply to units registered before 1st January, 2002.]

11.2 Parenteral preparations in plastic containers by Form-Fill-Seal/Blow, FillSeal Technology.-The whole operation of manufacture of large volume parenteral preparations in plastic containers including plastic pouches by automatic (all operations in one station) Form-Fill-Seal machine or by semi-automatic blow moulding, filling-cum-sealing machine may be divided into following separate areas/rooms, namely: -

(1) Water management area.
(2) Solution preparation area.
(3) Containers moulding-cum-filling and sealing area.
(4) Sterilization area.
(5) Quarantine area .
(6) Visual inspection area.
(7) Packaging area.

The following equipment is recommended for different above mentioned areas namely: -

(a) Water management area:

(1) De-ionised water treatment unit.
(2) Distillation unit (multi column with heat exchangers).
(3) Thermostatically controlled water storage tank.
(4) Transfer pumps.
(5) Stainless steel service lines for carrying water into user areas.
(b) Solution preparation area:
(1) Solution preparation and storage tanks.
(2) Transfer pumps.
(3) Cartridge and membrane filters.

(c) Container moulding-cum-filling and sealing area:

(1) Sterile Form-Fill-Seal machine (all operations in one station with built-in laminar air flow workstation having integrated container output conveyor belt through pass box).
(2) Arrangement for feeding plastic granules through feeding-cum-filling tank into the machine.

1. Ins. by 431(E), dt. 30.6.2005.

(d) Sterilization area: Super heated steam sterilizer (with computer control for sterilization cycle along with trolley sets for loading/unloading containers for sterilization).

(e) Quarantine area:- Adequate number of platforms/racks with storage system.

(f) Visual inspection area. - Visual inspection unit (with conveyor belt and composite white and black assembly supported with illumination).
(g) Packaging area:

(1) Pressure leak test apparatus (pressure belt or rotating disc type).
(2) Batch coding machine (preferably automatic).
(3) Labelling unit (preferably conveyor belt type).

Area. – (1) A minimum area of two hundred and fifty square meters for the basic installation and an Ancillary area of one hundred and fifty square metres for large volume parenteral preparations in plastic containers by Form-Fill-Seal technology is recommended.
These areas shall be partitioned into suitable enclosures with airlock arrangements.

(2) Areas for formulations meant for external use and internal use shall be separately provided to avoid mix up.

(3) Packaging materials for large volume parenteral shall have a minimum area of 100 square meters.]

1[Note: The requirement for ancillary area in this part shall not apply to units registered before 1st January, 2002.]

1[Note I: There are certain categories of drugs such as chemicals and pharmaceutical aids, gauzes and bandages, medicinal gases, empty gelatin capsules, non- chemical/mechanical contraceptives, diagnostic kits and reagents, medical devices, new dosage forms and their delivery systems, disinfectant fluids, antacids, raw-materials manufactured from sea bittern, veterinary biologicals including poultry vaccines, re-packing of drugs, etc. for which this Schedule does not prescribe specific requirements of space and equipments. The Licensing Authority, as the case may be, in respect of such categories of drugs, have the discretion to modify the requirements of this Schedule, if he is of the opinion that having regard to the nature off the products and extent of manufacturing operations and for reasons to be recorded in writing, it is necessary to relax or alter them in the circumstances of a particular case and direct the manufacturer to carry out necessary modifications in them and the modifications having been made, approve the manufacturer of such categories of the drugs.

Note II: In case of manufacturers licensed to manufacture drugs prior to the 11th December, 2001, the requirements of this Schedule shall also apply to them from 1st July, 2005.]

1 [SCHEDUE M-I [See Rule 85E (2)]

GOOD MANUFACTURING PRACTICES AND REQUIREMENTS OF PREMISES,
PLANT AND EQUIPMENT FOR HOMOEOPATHIC MEDICINES

1.GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:

1.1 Location and Surroundings: - The premises shall be situated at a clean place which shall not be adjacent to open drains, public lavatory or any factory producing pollution of any kind, garbage dump, slaughter house or any other source likely to cause contamination from the external environment. The premises shall be located away from railway lines so that the performance of sensitive electronic equipment is not affected by vibrations. There shall be no open drains inside or outside the manufacturing premises. It shall be so designed that the entry of rodents is checked. The drains shall facilitate easy flow of the effluent and shall be cleared periodically.

1.2 Building: - The premises shall not be used for any purpose other than manufacture of homoeopathic drugs and no part of the manufacturing premises shall be used for any other purpose. Other facilities, if needed, could be provided in separate building(s) in the same campus. Crude raw materials, packing materials, etc.
shall be stored and handled in places earmarked for them and shall not be taken inside areas where critical operations of manufacture are done excepting processed raw material. Heating, washing, drying, packing and labelling etc.
wherever needed, shall be done in dedicated ancillary areas adjacent to the manufacturing sections concerned. The walls and floorings of manufacturing areas shall be smooth and free from chinks, cracks and crevices and shall be washable. The design of the windows, windowpanes and all fittings shall be such that they will not facilitate accumulation / lodging of dust and other contaminants.

1. Subs. by G.S.R. No. 678(E) , dt. 31-10-2006, for Schedule MI. Earlier Schedule MI was inserted by G.S.R. 507 (E), dt:
12.6.1987. Schedule M1, before substitution, stood as under.:

―SCHEDUE M-I [See Rule 85E (2)]

1. Requirement of factory premises for manufacture of Homeopathic preparations-

(a) Location and surroundings. - The factory shall be situated in a place which shall not be adjacent to an open sewage drain, public lavatory or any factory which produces a disagreeable or obnoxious odour or fumes or large quantities of soot, dust or smoke. The factory shall be located in a sanitary place, remove from filthy surroundings.

(b) Buildings. - The part of the building used for manufacturing shall not be used for a sleeping place and no sleeping place adjoining to it shall communicate therewith except through open air or through an intervening open space. The walls of the room in which manufacturing operations are carried out shall, upto a height of six feet from the floor, be smooth, waterproof and shall be capable of being kept clean. The flooring shall be smooth, even and washable and shall be such as not to permit retention or accumulation of dust. There shall be no chinks or crevices in the walls or floor.

(c) The building used for the factory shall be constructed so as to permit production under hygienic conditions laid down in the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948).

(d) Water Supply. - The water used in manufacture shall be pure and drinkable quality, free from pathogenic microorganisms.

(e) Disposal of waste. - There should be adequate arrangement for disposal of waste-water and other residues from the laboratory.

(f) The rooms should be airy and clean and the temperature of the room should be moderately comfortable.

(g) Health, Clothing and Sanitary requirement of the Staff. - All workers shall be free from contagious or obnoxious disease. Their clothing shall consist of a white or coloured uniform suitable to the nature of the work and the climate, and shall be clean. Adequate facilities for personal cleanliness, such as clean towels, soap and hand scrubbing brushes, shall be provided separately for each sex. The workers shall be required to wash and change into clean footwear before entering the rooms where the manufacturing operations are carried on. Workers shall be required to wear either a clean cap or a suitable headgear so as to avoid any possibility of contamination by air or perspiration.

(h) Medical services. - The manufacturer shall provide adequate facilities for First Aid, Medical inspection of workers at the time of employment and periodically check-up thereafter at least once a year.

(i) Working benches. - Working benches shall be provided for carrying out operations such as filling, labelling, packing etc. Such benches shall be fitted with smooth, impervious tops capable of being washed.

(j) Container management. - Where operations involving use of containers such as bottles, phials and jars are conducted, there shall be adequate arrangements separated from potentisation chamber for washing, cleaning and drying such containers, with suitable equipment for the purpose. Wherever these are attended manually adequate precaution of perfection in respect of cleanliness and avoidance of pollutants shall be taken.

2. Requirements of Plant and Equipment:

(a) Mother tinctures. External tinctures and Mother solution section. - The following plant and equipment shall be provided namely: -

(i) Disintegrator.
(ii) Sieved Separator.
(iii) Balances and fluid measures.
(iv) Chopping boards and knives.
(v) Macerators with lids.
(vi) Percolators with lids and regulated discharge.
(vii) Moisture determination apparatus or other suitable arrangement.
(viii) Filtering arrangement.
(ix) Mixing vessels and suitable non-metallic storage containers.
(x) Portable stirrers.
(xi) Water still.

Note: (1) As far as possible metal contacts may be avoided once the drug is processed. (2) An area of 55 sq. meters is recommended for basic installations.
(3) Adequate separate storage facility should be provided for raw material quarantine, storage and bonded room for alcohol where applicable.

(4) Separate and suitable storage facility should be provided for fresh herbs and odorous raw materials.

(5) Adequate laboratory facility shall be provided for testing of raw materials and finished products,

(b) Potentisation Section. - (1) The following arrangements are recommended for container for closure preparation section namely:

(i) Washing tanks with suitable brushing arrangement manual or mechanical.
(ii) Purified Water rinsing tank (iii) Closure macerating or washing tanks.
(iv) Drying chambers.

An area of 20 sq. meters is recommended for basic installations.

(2) The following arrangements are recommended for potency preparation section, namely:
– (i) Working tables with washable top.
(ii) Facilities for separate storage of different grades of back potencies.
(iii) Suitable measuring devices for discharge of drug and diluent in potentisation vial, (iv) Potentiser with counter or suitable manual arrangement.

Note: - (1) Different droppers shall be used for different drugs potencies.

(2) All measuring devices shall be of metric system and be made of glass and shall be free from metallic contents.

(3) It is desired that glass droppers etc. intended for re-use after cleaning should be sterilized by autoclave or heating in a hot air oven.

(4) Plastics, rubber tubes, bulks etc. coming in contact with tinctures or back potencies should not be re-used for other tincture and potencies.

(5) Method of potentisation will be adopted as specified in Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia of India Vol. I.

3. Triturating, Tableting and Pill/Globules section - (3) The following arrangements are recommended: (i) Triturating machine for suitable device.
(ii) Disintegrator.
(iii) Mass Mixer. (iv) Granulator. (v) Oven.
(vi) Tableting punches or machines.
(vii) Kettle (Steam/gas/electrically heated) for preparation solution. (viii) Dryers.
(ix) Sieved separator, tablet counters and balances.

Note: Tablet section shall be free from dust and floating particles. An area of 55 sq. meters is recommended for basic installations.

(4) Ointments and lotion section:

The following arrangements are recommended namely: -

(i) Mixing tank (ii) Kettle (Steam, gas or electrically heated). (iii) Suitable powder mixer (iv) Ointment mill (v) Filling equipment or arrangement.

An area of 20 sq. meters is recommended for basic installations. (5) Syrups and tonics:
The following arrangements are recommended namely:- (i)

Mixing and storage tank.
(ii) Potable mixer.
(iii) Filtering equipment. (iv) Water still / Deioniser.
(v) Filling and sealing equipment.

An area of 20 sq. meters is recommended for basic installations. (6) Ophthalmic Preparations:
The following equipment is recommended for manufacture under aseptic conditions of EyeOintments, Eye-Drops, Eye-lotions and other preparations for external use, namely: -

(i) Hot air even electrically heated with thermostatic control. (ii) Colloid mill or ointment mill.
(iii) Kettle (gas or electrically heated) with suitable mixing arrangement. (iv) Tube filling equipment.
(v) Mixing and storage tanks of stainless steel or of other suitable material.
(vi) Sintered glass funnel, Seitz filter or filter candle. (vii) Liquid filling equipment.
(viii) Autoclaves.

Adequate precaution should be taken to ensure that the finished product is sterile. An area of 20 sq.
meters is recommended for basic installations.

(7) Adequate arrangements for space and equipment should be made for labelling and packing.‖

2. PLANT AND EQUIPMENT:

2.1 General: - The design of the plant shall be suitable for the nature and quantum of the activities involved. Equipment shall be installed in such a manner as to facilitate easy flow of materials and to check criss-cross movement of the personnel.
The entry to all manufacturing sections shall be regulated and persons not associated with the activities in the sections shall not have access to them. There shall be arrangements for personal cleanliness of workers and toilets. These shall be separate for men and women workers. There shall be suitable arrangement, separate for men and women, to change from their outside dress and footwear into the factory dress and footwear. Uniforms of suitable colours and fabric which facilitate proper washing and which do not shed fibres other contaminants shall be provided. Suitable headcovers and gloves shall be provided to the workers. The manufacturing premises shall not be used for dining. There shall be separate area for the personnel to take food or rest. Toilets shall be located in or adjacent to any of the areas concerned with any manufacturing activity. Spitting, smoking, chewing, littering, etc. in the manufacturing or ancillary areas shall not be permitted. Standard operating practices (SOPs) for cleaning and sanitation, personal hygiene of the workers, general and specific upkeep of the plant, equipment and premises and every activity associated with manufacture of drugs including procurement, quarantine, testing and warehousing of material shall be written and adopted. No person with any contagious disease shall be involved in any of the manufacturing activities. There shall be proper arrangements for maintenance of the equipment and systems. The performance of every equipment and system shall be properly validated and their use shall be monitored. Dos and don‘ts in the matter of the use of the plant and equipment as may be applicable shall be written and displayed in all places.

There shall be separate dedicated areas for each ancillary activity such as receipt, cleaning, warehousing and issue of raw materials, packaging materials, containers and closures, finished goods etc. Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent entry/presence etc. of insects, rodents, birds, lizards and other animals into the raw material handling areas. Every material shall have proper identification and control numbers and inventory tags and labels displaying status of the quality being used, etc.
There shall be proper arrangements and SOPs for preventing mix-up of materials at every stage of handling. There shall be separate arrangements for handling and warehousing of materials of different origins. Materials with odour shall be kept in tightly closed containers and shall be well protected from other materials. Fresh materials and odorous materials shall, preferably be stored in separate dedicated areas.
Where bonded manufacturing and / or warehousing facilities are required as per

Excise laws, the facilities required shall be provided without compromise on the requirements specified above.

A well equipped laboratory for quality control/quality assurance of raw materials and finished products and for carrying out in-process controls shall be provided.

(a) Rooms: - The rooms shall be airy, ventilated, and maintained at temperatures which are moderate and comfortable. Sections which are required to be sterile, airconditioned and provided with air handling system shall be designed accordingly. All sections shall be free from insects, birds, rodents, worms etc. and suitable measures shall be taken to prevent the same from finding ways to the sections and equipment.
(b) Water: - The water used for manufacture of drugs shall be of the quality as prescribed in the rules or in the Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia concerned, as the case may be, and shall be prepared from pure drinking quality water, free from pathogenic organisms.
(c) Disposal of waste: - Effluents, organic and inorganic wastes shall be disposed of in such a manner as may be prescribed in the laws pertaining to pollution control and if no such law exists in the place of manufacture, they shall be rendered harmless and shall be disposed of in such a manner that they are not hazardous to health of the public or cattle or plants.
(d) Factories Act: - The provisions of the Factories Act, 1948(Act 63 of 1948), as applicable shall be adhered to.
(e) Medical Services:- All persons concerned with any activity pertaining to manufacture of drugs including handling of raw materials, packing materials, packing and labelling of drugs, etc. shall be medically examined for fitness at the time of employment and subsequently at periodic intervals and records thereof shall be maintained.
(f) Safety measures: - First-aid facilities shall be provided in such a manner that they are easily accessible and staff shall be imparted knowledge and training in firstaid measures as may be needed. Fire control equipment in suitable numbers shall be provided at easily accessible places near all sections including stores and warehouses.
(g) Workbenches: - Workbenches suitable to the nature and quantum of the work involved shall be provided in all sections. Such work benches in general, shall have smooth, washable and impervious tops and the parts shall not be rough or rusty or damaged otherwise.
(h) Container management: - Proper arrangements shall be made for receiving containers, closures and packing materials in secluded areas and for de-dusting the same, removal of wastes, washing, cleaning and drying. Suitable equipment shall be provided as may be needed, considering the nature of work involved. Where soaps and detergents are used to wash containers and closures used for primary packing, suitable procedure shall be prescribed and adopted for total removal of such materials from the containers and closures. Plastic containers which are likely to absorb active principle or which are likely to contaminate the contents may not be used.

Glass containers used shall be made of neutral glass. The closures and washers used shall be of inert materials which shall not absorb the active principles or contaminate the contents or which may otherwise be likely to cause deterioration of quality. The containers, closures and packing materials shall protect the properties of the medicines, Tablets, if blister-packed, shall have secondary protective packaging to protect the medicines from moisture, odour etc. Neutral glass phials and epoxy-coated closure shall be used for eye-drops. Transparent plastic containers may be used for eye-drops containing only aqueous preparations. Sterile plastic nozzles may be provided to eye-drops separately along with the medicine, whatever needed.

2.2. Personnel.- Manufacture of drugs shall be under the control of approved technical staff that shall possess the qualifications prescribed in rule 85.

3. REQUIREMENT OF EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES:

3.1 Mother tinctures and mother solutions:- The following equipment and facilities shall be provided:- (i) Disintegrator;
(ii) Sieved separator;
(iii) Balances, weights and fluid measures, all in metric system;
(iv) Chopping table/board and knives;
(v) Macerators with lids (all made of stainless steel of grade 304 or neutral glass);
(vi) Percolators (all made of stainless steel of grade 304);
(vii) Moisture determination apparatus;
(viii) Filter press/Sparkler filter (all metal parts shall be of stainless steel);
(ix) Mixing and storage vessels (Stainless steel of grade 304);
(x) Portable stirrers (Rod, blades and screws shall be of stainless steel);
(xi) Water still/water purifier;
(xii) Macerators and percolators for preparing mother solutions of materials of chemical origin. These shall be of material, which will not react with the chemicals, used and which do not bleach; and (xiii) Filling and sealing machine.

The area and facilities for manufacture of mother tinctures and mother solutions shall be separate and shall be 55 square meters for each for basic installations.

3.2 Potentisation section :- The section shall have the following facilities:- (i) Work benches with washable impervious tops;
(ii) Facilities for orderly storage of different potencies and back-potencies of various drugs;
(iii) Suitable devices for measuring and dispensing of potencies/back-potencies into the potentisation phials;
(iv) Potentiser with counter.

An area of 20 square meters shall be provided for basic installations.
Note: - (a) The requirement of potentiser is not mandatory. The process may be done manually also with proper SOPs. Potentiser, if used, shall be properly validated and shall be calibrated every time before commencement of work for proper performance.
(b) The manufactur er sh all use back-poten cies procur ed fr om Licen sed manufacturers and the firm shall maintain proper records of purchase or shall prepare own-back potencies . Every container of potencies and back-potencies shall be kept properly labelled and there shall not be mix-up of different medicines and different potencies.

3.3 Containers and Closures Section: - Separate area for preparation of containers and closures shall be provided adjacent to the potentisation section. This area shall have the following facilities:- (i) Washing tanks with suitable mechanical or hand operated brushes;
(ii) Rinsing tanks. Purified water shall be used for rinsing;
(iii) Closures washing / macerating tanks;
(iv) Driers;

Note: - (a) Different droppers shall be used only for each different medicine and different potency.
(b) All measures shall be in metric system. Measures used shall be of neutral glass.
Metal droppers and plastic droppers shall not be used.
(c) Glass droppers shall be reused only after proper cleaning and sterilization.

(d) Potentisation shall be done by the method(s) prescribed in the Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia of India.

3.4 Trituration, Tableting, Pills and Globules making sections:- The following basic equipment and facilities shall be provided:- (i) Triturating Machine;
(ii) Disintegrator;
(iii) Mass Mixer;
(iv) Granulator;
(v) Electrical Oven;
(vi) Tablets punching Machine;
(vii) Kettle (steam or electrically heated ) for preparing solutions;
(viii) Driers for drying granules and tablets;
(ix) Sieved separator (stainless steel);
(x) Tablet counter;
(xi) Balances;
(xii) Coating Pan with spray-gun;
(xiii) Multi-sifter (xiv) Mill with perforations.

An area of 55 square meters shall be provided for basic installations. The area shall be suitably divided into cubicles to minimize cross contamination, mix-up etc.
Note: - The section shall be free from insects, worms, rodents, dust and other floating particles and moisture.

3.5 Syrups and other oral liquids section:- The following basic equipment and facilities shall be provided:- (i) Mixing and storage tanks (stainless steel of grade 304);
(ii) Portable stirrer (rod, blades and screws shall be of stainless steel);
(iii) Filter press / Sparkler filter (all metal parts shall be of stainless steel);
(iv) Filling and sealing machine;
(v) pH meter.
An area of 20 square meters shall be provided for basic installations. The section shall be free from dust and other floating particles, cobwebs, flies, ants and other insects, birds, lizards and rodents.

(1) Adequate number of workbenches shall be provided.
(2) Visual inspection table shall be provided. This shall comprise of a colour con trast backgr ound with lamp for providing diffused ligh t, mounted on a suitable table.

3.6 Ointments and lotions section :- The following basic equipments and facilities shall be provided:- (i) Mixing tanks (Stainless steel) (ii) Kettle (steam or electrically heated) for preparing solutions (iii) Suitable powder / planetary Mixer (iv) Ointment mill / colloidal Mill / Emulsifier (v) Filling and sealing machine / Crimping machine (vi) Filtering equipment (vii) Balance and weights

A minimum area of 20 square meters shall be provided for basic installations. An ancillary area for washing vessels and equipment shall be provided. An ancillary area for heating purposes shall also be provided.

3.7 Ophthalmic preparations section:- The following basic equipment and facilities shall be provided:- (i) Hot air oven, electrically heated, with thermostatic control;

(ii) Laminar Air Flow bench;
(iii) Air Handling Unit with HEPA filters to provide filtered air and positive pressure to the section and air-locks;
(iv) Ointment mill / colloidal mill;
(v) Mixing and storage tanks (Stainless steel of grade 304);
(vi) Pressure vessels, as may be needed;
(vii) Sintered glass funnels, Seitz Filter / Filter candle;
(viii) Vacuum pump;
(ix) Filling machines for liquids ointments etc.;
(x) Autoclaves with pressure and temperature gauges; and (xi) Necessary workbenches, visual inspection bench, etc.

Area: Minimum area of 20 square meters shall be provided for basic installations.
Note: -
1. The section shall have a clean room facility of Class 100 specification.
2. The section shall be air-conditioned and humidity controlled.
3. Entry to the sections shall be regulated through air-locks with differential air pressures with the air-lock adjacent to the section having higher pressure and the first one through which entry is made with the least pressure.
4. Materials shall be passed to the sections through suitable hatches.
5. The personnel shall wear sterile clothing including headgear, which shall not shed fibre.
6. Washing of phials shall be done in separate areas with proper equipment. Proper facilities shall be provided in the area for washing vessels.
Separate area shall be provided for packing and labelling.

4. QUALITY CONTROL DIVISION:
4.1 Functions: - A separate quality control division shall be provided in the premises.
The section shall be under the control of an approved technical officer, independent of the manufacturing division and directly responsible to the management. The section shall be responsible for ensuring the quality of all raw materials, packing materials and finished goods.
The section shall also carry out in-process quality checks of the products. The section shall be responsible for the stability of the products and for prescribing their shelf life wherever applicable.
The functions of the division shall include:- (1) To test the identity, quality and purity of the raw materials and to recommend rejection of the material of poor quality and approve materials of the prescribed quality only.
(2) To test the identity, quality and purity of the finished products and to recommend rejection of the material of poor quality and to approve materials of the prescribed quality only.
(3) To prepare and validate the methods of analysis, validate the equipment, monitor their use, take steps for proper maintenance, etc.
(4) To approve or reject container s, closures and packaging materials in accordance with the prescribed norms.
(5) To exercise / carry out in-process control of products.
(6) To prescribe SOPs on all matters concerning quality of materials and products.
(7) To monitor the storage and handling of raw materials, finished products, containers, closures and packaging materials.
(8) To investigate complaints on quantity of products and take / recommend appropriate measures and to examine returned goods and recommend their proper disposal.

4.2 Personnel: - The quality control staff shall be full-time personnel. Analysis and tests of drugs, raw materials, etc. shall be done by qualified and approved technical staff. The technical staff shall have the minimum qualification of degree in Homoeopathic Pharmacy or Science with Chemistry or Botany as the principal subject and experience of not less than

two years in the test and analysis of medicines including handling of instruments.

4.3 Equipment: - The following equipment shall be provided:- (i) Microscope of suitable magnification and photographic device;
(ii) Dissecting microscope;
(iii) TLC apparatus;
(iv) UV lamp viewer;
(v) Monopan Digital Electronic Balance;
(vi) Hot air oven;
(vii) Distillation apparatus;
(viii) Water Bath;
(ix) Polarimeter;
(x) Refractometer;
(xi) Melting point apparatus;
(xii) pH meter;
(xiii) Magnetic stirrer;
(xiv) Table Centrifuge;
(xv) Muffle furnace / electric Bunsen;
(xvi) Moisture determination apparatus;
(xvii) U.V. Spectrophotometer;
(xviii) Rotary microtome / Section cutting facilities;
(xix) Tablet Disintegration Machine.

5. RAW MATERIALS:
5.1 Raw materials of Plant Origin:- (a) The raw materials of plant origin used for manufacture of drugs shall be of the following specifications:- (i) the materials shall be those recently collected and dried and shall be free from moisture so as to eliminate the risk of deterioration and infestation with pests moulds, etc. The materials shall be collected when the atmospheric temperature is suitable where its active constituents are not changed / damaged / destroyed.
(ii) when fresh materials are to be used, the time lapse from the time of collection to use shall be minimized to the extent possible;
(iii) the materials should be taken from healthy plants and shall be free from parasites, moulds, etc.;
(iv) the materials shall be free of inorganic or organic foreign matter;
(v) when dry materials are procured, they shall be from healthy plants and shall be in unprocessed form, free from all extraneous matters such as fungus, insects, moulds, pathogenic organisms, etc. and should not be more than six months old. Plant materi alsof Agaricaceae, which are perishable shall be used within one week of ollection.

(b) To facilitate proper identification and purity of the material and to exercise proper quality control of the material, the following conditions must be satisfied:- (i) a small twig of the plant with leaves shall be available if the part used is bark of the plant;
(ii) an entire plant or part or aerial twig with leaves and some uncut roots / rhizomes / bulbs shall be available if the part used is a root /rhizome / bulb;
(iii) if plants with flowers are to be used, a few dry flowers shall also be available with the aerial twig;
(iv) if the material used is a mould or of the plant families Agaricaceae, Polyporaceae/ amanitacaea / Boletaceae / Russulaceae, a whole specimen plant / mould shall be available in properly dried form;
(v) the materials shall be free from insecticides, fungicides, etc;
(vi) the materials shall be in open mesh bags or in suitable material which permits the passage of air inside;
(vii) each consignment of the material shall be accompanied by a statement of the supplier‘s name; name of the plant with description of the part supplied. The

pharmacopoeial reference, place of collection /harvest, date and time of collection and packaging and weight.

5.2 Raw material of Chemical origin: - They shall be of respective pharmacopoeial standards and statements of their specification shall accompany the materials.
5.3 Raw materials of animal origin: - The materials shall be those collected from healthy animals and shall be of pharmacopoeial specifications. The materials shall be those collected, packed and transported under proper hygienic conditions and well protected from all contamination. The materials shall be accompanied by statements as in para ̳a‘ above. In case of drugs derived from a whole insect, bulk of such drugs along with some uncut whole insect should be provided / maintained for records.
5.4 Sarcodes: - The materials shall be those collected from healthy animals and shall be of pharmacopoeial specification. The materials shall be those collected, packed and transported under proper hygienic conditions and well protected from all contamination. The materials shall be accompanied by statements as in the Para ̳a‘ above. The materials shall be tested to see that they are free from pathogenic organisms such as E. Coli, Salmonella, etc.
5.5 Nosodes: - These shall be of pharmacopoeial specifications. As these are derived from diseased animals or human beings, they shall be autoclaved immediately after collection and preserved and transported under proper hygienic conditions and well protected from all contamination. Before use, these shall be sterilized by autoclaving and shall comply with the test for sterility as specified in the Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia.

6. PROCEDURES:
6.1 Manufacture of Mother tinctures: - (a) Every material shall be identified and checked for its purity. They shall be cleaned and processed by cutting, chopping, etc. for use in macerators / percolators. A specimen of the material shall be preserved till approval of the product for release for sale.
(b) The design and procedures adopted shall ensure reproduction of the product of the same quality every time.
(c) Mother tinctures shall be preserved in tight closed neutral containers at temperatures preferably below 250 C, protected from light.
6.2 Manufacture of Attenuations: - (a) Attenuations shall be prepared in a clean room environment with filtered air and positive pressure inside suitable for the operations.
(b) The methods used shall be reproducible and shall be validated.
(c) The containers, tubings, etc. of the machines used for manufacture of attenuations shall be thoroughly washed, cleaned and dried after attenuation of a drug. Regular checks shall be carried out on the materials.
(d) The parts of the equipment that come into contact with the attenuation materials shall be of neutral quality and shall not cause any contamination to the material.
(e) Attenuations shall be preserved in properly labeled glass containers.
(f) Alcohol and other vehicles used shall be of Homoeopathic pharmacopoeia specification and shall be free from impurities.
6.3 Trituration: - Trituration technique is used to manufacture drugs from insoluble strains.
The procedure / method specified in the Homoeopathic pharmacopoeia shall be adopted.
6.4 Formulations:- Compound formulations shall preferably be in liquid and solid forms and the potency of the ingredients shall be in detectable quantity preferably be in 3x except in case of highly poisonous material and toxins which should not be below 6x. The ingredients shall be compatible to each other. Complete pharmacopoeial name of each ingredient shall be printed on the label along with composition.
6.5 Medicated Insert Pellets: - (a) Pellets shall be manufactured in clean rooms free from particulate contaminants. The equipment used shall enable prevention of contamination and cross- contamination.
(b) The procedures shall be validated.

7. LABORATORY CONTROLS:
Tests as per the pharmacopoeia and requirements shall be carried out on products and materials. The stability of the products shall be established by proper methods. Sterility tests,

wherever applicable, shall be carried out. Control samples shall be preserved for not less than three years after the last sales.

8. PACKINGAND LABELLING:
A minimum area of 50 square meters shall be provided for packing and labeling section.

9. EXPIRYDATE:
Not exceeding sixty (60) months from the date of manufacture.

10. STANDARD OPERATING PRACTICES:
Standard Operating Practices (SOPs) shall be developed for various activities such as receipt, identification, cleaning, drying, warehousing, issue, handling, sampling etc. of all materials. Labels and packing materials shall be examined for correctness and compliance with rules. Records shall be maintained for their printing, use, destruction etc.

11. RECORDSAND REGISTERS:
Records shall be maintained for all the activities. These shall include records of production, records of raw materials, records of testing, records of sales and other supplies, records of rejection, complaints and actions taken, SOPs and records in respect of compliance thereof, log books of equipment, master formula records, records of medical examination and fitness of personnel etc. All records shall be maintained for a period of one year after the expiry of a batch or for three years whichever is later.

1[SCHEDULE M-II [See Rule 139]

REQUIREMENTS OF FACTORY PREMISES FOR MANUFACTURE
OF COSMETICS

I. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

(A) Location and surroundings.–The factory shall be located in a sanitary place and hygienic conditions shall be maintained in the premises. Premises shall not be used for residence or be interconnected with residential area. It shall be well ventilated and clean.

(B) Buildings.– The buildings used for the factory shall be constructed so as to permit production under hygienic conditions and not to permit entry of insects, rodents, files, etc.

The walls of the room in which manufacturing operations are carried out, shall be up to a height of six feet from the floor, be smooth, waterproof and capable of being kept clean.
The flooring shall be smooth, even and washable and shall be such as not to permit retention or accumulation of dust.

(C) Water supply: - The water used in manufacture shall be of potable quality.

(D) Disposal of water. –- Suitable arrangements shall be made for disposal of waste-water.

(E) Health, clothing and sanitary requirements of the staff.– All workers shall be free from contagious or infectious diseases. They shall be provided with clean uniforms, masks, headgears, and gloves wherever required. Washing facilities shall also be provided.

(F) Medical Services. - Adequate facilities for first aid shall be provided.

(G) Work benches shall be provided for carrying out operations such as filling, labelling, packing, etc. Such benches shall be fitted with smooth, impervious tops capable of being washed.

(H) Adequate facilities shall be provided for washing and drying of glass containers if the same are to be used for packing the product.

II. REQUIREMENTS OF PLANT AND EQUIPMENT

The following equipment, area and other requirements are recommended for the manufacture of: − A. Powders:− Face powder, cake make-up, compacts, face packs, masks and rouges, etc.

1. Equipment:

(a) Powder mixer of suitable type provided with a dust collector.
(b) Perfume and colour blender.
(c) Sifter with sieves of suitable mesh size.
(d) Ball mill or suitable grinder.

1. Ins. by G.S.R 723(E) , dt. 11-8-1992.

(e) Trays and scoops (stainless steel).
(f) Filling and sealing equipment provided with dust extractor.
(g) For compacts: - (i) a separate mixer, (ii) compact pressing machine.
(h) Weighing and measuring devices (i) Storage tanks.

An area of 15 square meters is recommended. The section is to be provided with adequate exhaust fans.

B.
Creams, lotions, emulsions, pastes, cleansing milks, shampoos, pomade, brilliantine, shaving creams and hair-oils etc.

(a) Mixing and storage tanks of suitable materials.
(b) Heating kettle – steam, gas or electrically heated.
(c) Suitable agitator.
(d) Colloidal mill or homogeniser (wherever necessary).
(e) Triple roller mill (wherever necessary).
(f) Filling and sealing equipment.
(g) Weighing and measuring devices.

An area of 25 square meters is recommended.

C. Nail Polishes and Nail lacquers.

1. Equipment:

(a) A suitable mixer.
(b) Storage tanks.
(c) Filling machine – hand operated or power driven.
(d) Weighing and Measuring devices.

An area of 15 square meters is recommended. The section shall be provided with flameproof exhaust system.

2. Premises:–The following are the special requirements related to Nail Polishes and Nail Lacquers: -

(a) It shall be situated in an industrial area.
(b) It shall be separate from other cosmetic-manufacturing areas by metal/brick partition up to ceiling.
(c) Floors, walls, ceiling and doors shall be fireproof.
(d) Smoking, cooking and dwelling shall not be permitted and no naked flame shall be brought in the premises.
(e) All electrical wiring and connections shall be concealed and main electric switch shall be outside the manufacturing area.
(f) All equipment, furniture and light fittings in the section shall be flameproof.
(g) Fire extinguisher like foam and dry powder and sufficient number of buckets containing sand shall be provided.
(h) All doors of the section shall open outwards.

3. Storage:
All explosive solvents and ingredients shall be stored in metal cupboards or in a separate enclosed area.

4. Manufacture:

(a) Manufacture of lacquer shall not be undertaken unless the above conditions are complied with.
(b) Workers shall be asked to wear shoes with rubber soles in the section.

5. Other requirements:

No objection certificate from the local Fire Brigade Authorities shall be furnished.

D. Lipsticks and Lip-gloss, etc.

1. Equipment

(a) Vertical mixer.
(b) Jacketted kettle – steam, gas or electrically heated.
(c) Mixing vessel (stainless steel).
(d) Triple roller mill/Ball mill.
(e) Moulds with refrigeration facility.
(f) Weighing and measuring devices.
An area of 15 square meters is recommended.

E. Depilatories.

1. Equipment:

(a) Mixing tanks.
(b) Mixer (c) Triple roller mill or homogeniser (where necessary).
(d) Filling and sealing equipment.
(e) Weighing and measuring devices.
(f) Moulds (where necessary).
An area of 10 square meters is recommended.

F.
Preparations used for Eyes: - Such preparations shall be manufactured under strict hygienic conditions to ensure that these are safe for use.

1. Eyebrows, Eyelashes, Eyeliners, etc.

1 Equipment:

(a) Mixing tanks.
(b) A suitable mixer.
(c) Homogeniser (where necessary) (d) Filling and sealing equipment.
(e) Weighing and measuring devices.

An area of 10 square meters is recommended.

2. Kajal and Surma

1. Equipment:

(a) Base sterilizer.
(b) Powder sterilizer (dry heat oven).
(c) Stainless steel tanks.
(d) A suitable Mixer.

(e) Stainless steel sieves.
(f) Filling and sealing arrangements.
(g) Weighing and measuring devices.
(h) Homogeniser (where necessary).
(i) Pestle and Mortar (for Surma).
An area of 10 square meters with a separate area of 5 square meters for base sterilization is recommended.
Other requirements for 1 and 2:

(a) False ceiling shall be provided wherever required.
(b) Manufacturing area shall be made fly proof. An airlock or an aircurtain shall be provided.
(c) Base used for Kajal shall be sterilized by heating the base at 150 degree C for required time in a separate enclosed area.
(d) The vegetable carbon black powder shall be sterilized in a drying oven at 120 degree C for required time.
(e) All utensils used for manufacture shall be of stainless steel and shall be washed with detergent water, antiseptic liquid and again with distilled water.
(f) Containers employed for ̳Kajal‘ shall be cleaned properly with bactericidal solution and dried.
(g) Workers shall put on clean overalls and use hand gloves wherever necessary.

G. Aerosol.

1. Equipment: -

(a) Air-compressor (wherever necessary).
(b) Mixing tanks.
(c) Suitable propellant filling and crimping equipments.
(d) Liquid filling unit.
(e) Leak testing equipment.
(f) Fire extinguisher (wherever necessary) (g) Suitable filtration equipment.
(h) Weighing and measuring devices.

An area of 15 square meters is recommended.

2. Other requirements: - No objection certificate from the Local Fire Brigade Authorities shall be furnished.

H. Alcoholic Fragrance Solutions.

Equipment: -

(a) Mixing tanks with stirrer (b) Filtering equipment.
(c) Filling and sealing equipment.
(d) Weighing and measuring devices.

An area of 15 square meters is recommended.

I. Hair Dyes.

Equipment:

(a) Stainless steel tanks.
(b) Mixer.

(c) Filling Unit.
(d) Weighing and measuring devices.
(e) Masks, gloves and goggles.
An area of 15 square meters with proper exhaust is recommended.

J. Tooth powders and toothpastes, etc.:

1. Tooth-powder in General.
Equipment:

(a) Weighing and measuring devices.
(b) Dry mixer (powder blender).
(c) Stainless steel sieves.
(d) Powder filling and sealing equipments.
An area of 15 square meters with proper exhaust is recommended.

2. Toothpastes.

Equipment:

(a) Weighing and measuring devices.
(b) Kettle – steam, gas or electrically heated (where necessary).
(c) Planetary mixer with de-aerator system.
(d) Stainless steel tanks.
(e) Tube filling equipment.
(f) Crimping machine.

An additional area of 15 square meters with proper exhaust is recommended.

3. Tooth-powder (Black) Equipment:
(a) Weighing and measuring devices.
(b) Dry mixer powder blender.
(c) Stainless steel sieves.
(d) Powder filling arrangements.

An area of 15 square meters with proper exhaust is recommended. Areas for manufacturing ―Black‖ and ―White‖ tooth powders should be separate.

K. Toilet Soaps:

Equipment: -

(a) Kettles/pans for saponification.
(b) Boiler or any other suitable heating arrangement.
(c) Suitable stirring arrangement.
(d) Storage tanks or trays.
(e) Driers.
(f) Amalgamator/chipping machine.
(g) Mixer.
(h) Triple roller mill.
(i) Granulator.
(j) Plodder.
(k) Cutter.
(l) Pressing, stamping and embossing machine.
(m) Weighing and measuring devices.

A minimum area of 100 square meters is recommended for the small-scale manufacture of toilet soaps.

The areas recommended above are for basic manufacturing of different categories of cosmetics. In addition to that separate adequate space for storage of raw materials, finished products, packing materials shall be provided in factory premises.1[***]

Note No. I−The above requirements of the Schedule are made subject to modification at the discretion of the Licensing Authority, if he is of the opinion that having regard to the nature and extent of the manufacturing operations it is necessary to relax or alter them in the circumstances of a particular case.

Note No. II.−The above requirements do not include requirements of machinery, equipments and premises required for preparation of containers and clousers of different categories of cosmetics. The Licensing Authority shall have the discretion to examine the suitability and adequacy of the machinery, equipments and premises for the purpose of taking into consideration of the requirements of the licensee.

Note No. III.−Schedule M-II specifies equipments and space required for certain categories of cosmetics only. There are other cosmetics items, viz. Attars, perfumes, etc., which are not covered in the above categories. The Licensing Authority shall, in respect of such items or categories of cosmetics have the discretion to examine the adequacy of factory premises, space, plant and machinery and other requisites having regard to the nature and extent of the manufacturing operations involved and direct the licensee to carry on necessary modification in them.

1. The words ―A testing laboratory shall also be provided‖ omitted by G.S.R.285 (E) , dt. 16.7.1996.

[SCHEDULE M-III [See rules 69, 69A, 75, 75A and 76]

QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM –FOR NOTIFIED MEDICAL DEVICES AND INVITRO DIAGNOSTICS

1. General Requirements:
1.1.
This schedule specifies requirements for a quality management system that shall be used by the manufacturer for the design and development, manufacture, packaging, labeling, testing, installation and servicing of medical devices and in-vitro diagnostics. If the manufacturer does not carry out design and development activity, the same shall be recorded in the quality management system. The manufacturer shall maintain conformity with this Schedule to reflect the exclusions.

1.2.
If any requirement in clause 7(product realisation) of this Schedule is not applicable due to the nature of the medical device and in-vitro diagnostics for which the quality management system is applied, the manufacturer does not need to include such a requirement in its quality management system.

1.3.
The processes required by this Schedule, which are applicable to the medical device and invitro diagnostic devices, but which are not performed by the manufacturer are the responsibility of the manufacturer and are accounted for in the manufacturer‘s quality management system.

1.4.
If a manufacturer engages in only some operations subject to the requirements of this part, and not in others, that manufacturer need only to comply with those requirements which are applicable to the operations in which it is engaged.

1.5.
It is emphasised that the quality management system requirements specified in this Schedule are in addition to complementary to technical requirements for products.

1.6.
Manufacturers of components or parts of finished devices and in-vitro diagnostics are encouraged to use appropriate provisions of this regulation as guidance.

2. Applicability:
The provisions of this Schedule shall be applicable to manufacturers of finished devices, In-Vitro Diagnostics, mechanical contraceptives (condoms, intrauterine devices, tubal rings), surgical dressings, surgical bandages, surgical staplers, surgical sutures and ligatures, blood and blood components collection bags with or without anticoagulants intended for human or animal use.

1. Subs.by G.S.R. 640 (E) , dt. 29.6.2016. Previously, Ins. by G.S.R. 109 (E) , dt. 22.2.1994.

3. Terms and definitions:
3.1 Active implantable medical device.- Active medical device which is intended to be totally or partially introduced, surgically or medically, into the human or animal body or by medical intervention into a natural orifice and which is intended to remain after the procedure.

3.2 Active medical device.- Medical device relying for its functioning on a source of electrical energy or any source of power other than that directly generated by the human or animal body or gravity.

3.3 Advisory notice.- Notice issued by the manufacturer, subsequent to delivery of the medical device and in-vitro diagnostic devices, to provide supplementary information or to advise what action should be taken in or both in:-

a.
the use of a medical device and in-vitro diagnostic devices;
b.
the modification of a medical device and in-vitro diagnostic devices;
c.
the return of the medical device and in-vitro diagnostic devices to the organization that supplied it; or d.
the destruction of a medical device and in-vitro diagnostic devices.

3.4 Customer complaint.- Written, electronic or oral communication that alleges deficiencies related to the identity, quality, durability, reliability, safety, effectiveness or performance of a medical device and in-vitro diagnostic devices that has been placed on the market.

3.5 Implantable medical device.- Medical device intended:- a.
to be totally or partially introduced into the human or animal body or a natural orifice; or b.
to replace an epithelial surface or the surface of the eye;
by surgical intervention, and which is intended to remain after the procedure for at least thirty days, and which can only be removed by medical or surgical intervention.

3.6 Component means any raw material, substance, piece, part, software, firmware, labeling, or assembly which is intended to be included as part of the finished, packaged, and labeled device.

3.7 Design input means the physical and performance requirements of a device that are used as a basis for device design.

3.8 Design output means the results of a design effort at each design phase and at the end of the total design effort. The finished design output is the basis for the device master record. The total

finished design output consists of the device, its packaging and labeling, and the device master record.

3.9 Design review means a documented, comprehensive, systematic examination of a design to evaluate the adequacy of the design requirements, to evaluate the capability of the design to meet these requirements, and to identify problems.

3.10 Finished device means any device or accessory to any device that is suitable for use or capable of functioning, whether or not it is packaged, labeled or sterilized.

3.11 In-vitro Diagnostic means in-vitro diagnostics referred in this Schedule including diagnostics kits and reagents that fall under sub-clause (i) of clause (b) of section 3 of Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

3.12 Management with executive responsibility means those senior employees of a manufacturer who have the authority to establish or make changes to the manufacturer's quality policy and quality system.

3.13 Medical device referred in this Schedule means devices that are notified under clause (iv) of sub-section (b) of section 3 of Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

3.14 Quality audit means a systematic, independent examination of a manufacturer's quality system that is performed at defined intervals and at sufficient frequency to determine whether both quality system activities and the results of such activities comply with quality system procedures, that these procedures are implemented effectively, and that these procedures are suitable to achieve quality system objectives.

3.15 Quality policy means the overall intention and direction of an organization with respect to quality, as established by management with executive responsibility.

3.16 Quality system means the organisational structure, responsibilities, procedures, processes, and resources for implementing quality management.

3.17 Rework means action taken on a nonconforming product that will fulfill the specified Device Master File requirements before it is released for distribution.

3.18 Specification means any requirement with which a product, process, service, or other activity must conform.

3.19 Validation means confirmation by examination and provision of objective evidence that the particular requirement for a specific intended use can be consistently fulfilled;

3.19.1 Process validation means establishing by objective evidence that a process consistently produces a result or product meeting its predetermined specifications.

3.19.2 Design validation means establishing by objective evidence that device specifications conform with user needs and intended use(s).

3.20 Verification means confirmation by examination and provision of objective evidence that specified requirements have been fulfilled.

4 Quality management system.-
4.1 General:
The manufacturer shall establish, document, implement and maintain a quality management system and maintain its effectiveness in accordance with the requirements of this schedule.
The manufacturer shall;- (a) identify the processes needed for the quality management system and their application throughout the organization;
(b) determine the sequence and interaction of these processes;
(c) determine criteria and methods needed to ensure that both the operation and control of these processes are effective;
(d) ensure the availability of resources and information necessary to support the operation and monitoring of these processes;
(e) monitor, measure and analyse these processes; and (f) implement actions necessary to achieve planned results and maintain the effectiveness of these processes.

These processes shall be managed by the manufacturer in accordance with the requirements of this Schedule. Where a manufacturer chooses to outsource any process that affects product conformity with requirements, the manufacturer shall ensure control over such processes. Control of such outsourced processes shall be identified within the quality management system.

NOTE: Processes needed for the quality management system referred to above shall include processes for management activities, provision of resources, product realization and measurement.

4.2 Documentation requirements.-
4.2.1 General The quality management system documentation shall include;-

(a) documented statements of a quality policy and quality objectives;
(b) a quality manual;
(c) documented procedures required by this schedule;
(d) documents needed by the manufacturer to ensure the effective planning, operation and control of its processes;
(e) records required by this schedule, and where this schedule specifies that a requirement, procedure, activity or special arrangement be ―documented‖, it shall, in addition, be implemented and maintained.

For each type or model of medical device or In-vitro Diagnostics, the manufacturer shall establish and maintain a file either containing or identifying documents defining product specifications and quality management system requirements. These documents shall define the complete manufacturing process and, if applicable, installation.

The manufacture shall prepare documentation for device or in-vitro diagnostics in a form of a Device Master File containing specific information as referred to in Annexure-A appended to this Schedule.

Data may be recorded by electronic data processing systems or other reliable means, but documents and record relating to the system in use shall also be available in a hard copy to facilitate checking of the accuracy of the records. Wherever documentation is handled by electronic data processing methods, authorized persons shall enter or modify data in the computer. There shall be record of changes and deletions. Access shall be restricted by ̳passwords‘ or other means and the result of entry of critical data shall be independently checked. Batch records electronically stored shall be protected by a suitable back-up. During the period of retention, all relevant data shall be readily available.

4.2.2 Quality manual.- The manufacturer shall establish and maintain a quality manual that includes:- (a) the scope of the quality management system, including details of and justification for any exclusion or non-application or both;

(b) the documented procedures established for the quality management system, or reference to them; and (c) a description of the interaction between the processes of the quality management system.
The quality manual shall outline the structure of the documentation used in the quality management system.

The manufacturer shall prepare documentation in a form of a Plant Master File containing specific information about the facilities, personnel and other details as prescribed in Annexure B appended to this Schedule.

4.2.3 Control of documents.- Documents required by the quality management system shall be controlled. Records are a special type of document and shall be controlled according to the requirements given in the control of records. Documents shall be approved, signed and dated by the appropriate and the authorised person.

A documented procedure shall be established to define the controls needed.- (a) to review and approve documents for adequacy prior to issue;
(b) to review and update as necessary and re-approve documents;
(c) to ensure that changes and the current revision status of documents are identified;
(d) to ensure that relevant versions of applicable documents are available at points of use;
(e) to ensure that documents remain legible and readily identifiable;
(f) to ensure that documents of external origin are identified and their distribution controlled;
and (g) to prevent the unintended use of obsolete documents, and to apply suitable identification to them if they are retained for any purpose.

Changes to document shall be reviewed and approved. Change records shall be maintained which will include a description of the change, identification of the affected documents, the signature of the approving individual, the approval date, and when the change becomes effective.
The manufacturer shall ensure that changes to documents are reviewed and approved either by the original approving functionary or another designated functionary which has access to pertinent background information upon which to base its decisions.

The manufacturer shall define the period for which at least one copy of obsolete controlled documents shall be retained. This period shall ensure that documents to which medical devices or invitro diagnostics have been manufactured and tested are retained for at least one year after the date of expiry of the medical device or in-vitro diagnostic as defined by the manufacturer.

4.2.4 Control of records.- Records shall be established and maintained to provide evidence of conformity to the requirements and of the effective operation of the quality management system. Records shall remain legible, readily identifiable and retrievable. A documented procedure shall be established to define the

controls needed for the identification, storage, protection, retrieval, retention time and disposition of records.

The manufacturer shall retain the records for a period of time at least one year after the date of expiry of the medical device or in-vitro diagnostics as defined by the manufacturer, but not less than two years from the date of product release by the manufacturer.

5 Management responsibility.-
5.1 Management commitment:
Top management of the manufacturer shall provide evidence of its commitment to the development and implementation of the quality management system and maintaining its effectiveness by:- (a) communicating to the employees the importance of meeting customer as well as statutory and regulatory requirements;
(b) establishing the quality policy;
(c) ensuring that quality objectives are established;
(d) conducting management reviews; and (e) ensuring the availability of resources.

5.2 Customer focus:
Top management of the manufacturer shall ensure that customer requirements are determined and are met.

5.3 Quality policy:
Top management of the manufacturer shall ensure that the quality policy:- (a) is appropriate to the purpose of the manufacturing facility;
(b) includes a commitment to comply with requirements and to maintain the effectiveness of the quality management system;
(c) provides a framework for establishing and reviewing quality objectives;
(d) is communicated and understood within the manufacturer‘s organization; and (e) is reviewed for continuing suitability.

5.4 Planning.-
5.4.1 Quality objectives:
Top management of the manufacturer shall ensure that quality objectives, including those needed to meet requirements for product, are established at relevant functions and levels within the manufacturing organization. The quality objectives shall be measurable and consistent with the quality policy.

5.4.2 Quality management system planning:

Top management of the manufacturer shall ensure that.- (a) the planning of the quality management system is carried out in order to meet the specified requirements, as well as the quality objectives; and (b) the integrity of the quality management system is maintained when changes to the quality management system are planned and implemented.

5.5 Responsibility, authority and communication.-
5.5.1 Responsibility and authority:
Top management of the manufacturer shall ensure that responsibilities and authorities are defined, documented and communicated within the manufacturing organisation.
Top management of the manufacturer shall establish the interrelation of all personnel who manage, perform and verify work affecting quality, and shall ensure the independence and authority necessary to perform these tasks.

5.5.2 Management representative:
Top management shall appoint a member of management who, irrespective of other responsibilities, shall have responsibility and authority that includes:- (a) ensuring that processes needed for the quality management system are established, implemented and maintained;
(b) reporting to top management on the performance of the quality management system and any need for improvement; and (c) ensuring the promotion of awareness of regulatory and customer requirements throughout the manufacturing organization.

5.5.3 Internal communication:
Top management shall ensure that appropriate communication processes are established within the Manufacturing organization and that communication takes place regarding the effectiveness of the quality management system.

5.6 Management review.-
5.6.1 General:
Top management shall review the organization‘s quality management system, at planned intervals, to ensure its continuing suitability, adequacy and effectiveness. This review shall include assessing opportunities for improvement and the need for changes to the quality management system, including the quality policy and quality objectives. Records from management reviews shall be maintained.

5.6.2 Review input:

The input to management review shall include information on:- (a) results of audits, (b) customer feedback, (c) process performance and product conformity, (d) status of preventive and corrective actions, (e) follow-up actions from previous management reviews, (f) changes that could affect the quality management system, (g) recommendations for improvement, and (h) new or revised regulatory requirements as and when issued.

5.6.3 Review output:
The output from the management review shall include any decisions and actions related to:- (a) improvements needed to maintain the effectiveness of the quality management system and its processes, (b) improvement of product related to customer requirements, and (c) resource needs.

6 Resource management.-
6.1 Provision of resources:
The manufacturing organization shall determine and provide the resources needed (a) to implement the quality management system and to maintain its effectiveness, and (b) to meet regulatory and customer requirements.

6.2 Human resources.-
6.2.1 General:
Personnel performing work affecting product quality shall be competent on the basis of appropriate education, training, skills and experience. Number of personnel employed shall be adequate and in direct proportion to the workload. Prior to employment, all personnel, shall undergo medical examination including eye examination, and shall be free from communicable or contagious diseases. Thereafter, they should be medically examined periodically, at least once a year. Records shall be maintained thereof.

6.2.2 Competence, awareness and training:
The manufacturer shall:- (a) determine the necessary competence for personnel performing work affecting product quality, (b) provide training or take other actions to satisfy these needs, (c) evaluate the effectiveness of the actions taken,

(d) ensure that its personnel are aware of the relevance and importance of their activities and how they contribute to the achievement of the quality objectives, (e) maintain appropriate records of education, training, skills and experience, and (f) establish documented procedures for identifying training needs and ensure that all personnel are trained to adequately perform their assigned responsibilities.

6.3 Infrastructure:
The organisation shall determine, provide and maintain the infrastructure needed to achieve conformity to product requirements. Infrastructure includes, as applicable:- (a) buildings, workspace and associated utilities.
(b) process equipment (both hardware and software), and (c) supporting services (such as transport or communication).

The manufacturer shall establish documented requirements for maintenance activities, including their frequency, when such activities or lack thereof can affect product quality. Records of such maintenance shall be maintained.

6.4 Work environment:
The organisation shall determine and manage the work environment needed to achieve conformity to product requirements. The following requirements shall apply, namely:- (a) the manufacturer shall establish documented requirements for health, cleanliness and clothing of personnel if contact between such personnel and the product or work environment could adversely affect the quality of the product;
(b) if work environment conditions can have an adverse effect on product quality, the manufacturer shall establish documented requirements as per Annexure-C of this schedule for the work environment conditions and documented procedures or work instructions to monitor and control these work environment condition;
(c) the manufacturer shall ensure that all personnel who are required to work temporarily under special environmental conditions within the work environment are appropriately trained and supervised by a trained person;
(d) if appropriate, special arrangements shall be established and documented for the control of contaminated or potentially contaminated product in order to prevent contamination of other product, the work environment or personnel.
(e) all personnel shall bear clean body covering appropriate to their duties. Smoking, eating, drinking, chewing or keeping food and drink shall not be permitted in production, laboratory and storage areas.

7 Product realisation.-
7.1 Planning of product realization:

The manufacturer shall plan and develop the processes needed for product realization. Planning of product realization shall be consistent with the requirements of the other processes of the quality management system.

In planning product realisation, the manufacturer shall determine the following, as appropriate:- (a) quality objectives and requirements for the product;
(b) the need to establish processes, documents, and provide resources specific to the product;

(c) required verification, validation, monitoring, inspection and test activities specific to the product and the criteria for product acceptance;
(d) records needed to provide evidence that the realisation processes and resulting product meet requirements.

The output of this planning shall be in a form suitable for the manufacturer‘s method of operations.

The manufacturer organisation shall establish documented requirements for risk management (as per the IS or ISO 14971) throughout product realisation. Records arising from risk management shall be maintained.

7.2 Customer-related processes.-
7.2.1 Determination of requirements related to the product:
The manufacturer shall determine:- (a) requirements specified by the customer, including the requirements for delivery and postdelivery activities, (b) requirements not stated by the customer but necessary for specified or intended use, where known;
(c) statutory requirements related to the product, and (d) any additional requirements determined by the manufacturer.

7.2.2 Review of requirements related to the product:
The manufacturer shall review the requirements related to the product. This review shall be conducted prior to the manufacturer's commitment to supply a product to the customer and shall ensure that:- (a) product requirements are defined and documented;
(b) contract or order requirements differing from those previously expressed are resolved; and (c) the manufacturer has the ability to meet the defined requirements.

Records of the results of the review and actions arising from the review shall be maintained.

Where the customer provides no documented statement of requirement, the customer requirements shall be confirmed by the manufacturer before acceptance.

Where product requirements are changed, the manufacturer shall ensure that relevant documents are amended and that relevant personnel are made aware of the changed requirements.

7.2.3 Customer communication:
The manufacturer shall determine and implement effective arrangements for communicating with customers in relation to:- (a) product information;
(b) enquiries, contracts or order handling, including amendments;
(c) customer feedback, including customer complaints; and (d) advisory notices.

7.3 Design and development.-
7.3.1 Design and development planning:
The manufacturer shall establish documented procedures for design and development. The manufacturer shall plan and control the design and development of product. During the design and development planning, the manufacturer shall determine :- (a) the design and development stages;
(b) the review, verification, validation and design transfer activities that are appropriate at each design and development stage; and (c) the responsibilities and authorities for design and development.

The manufacturer shall manage the interfaces between different groups involved in design and development to ensure effective communication and clear assignment of responsibility.

Planning output shall be documented, and updated as appropriate, as the design and development progresses.

NOTE: Design transfer activities during the design and development process ensure that design and development outputs are verified as suitable for manufacturing before becoming final production specifications.

7.3.2 Design and development inputs:
Inputs relating to product requirements shall be determined and records maintained. The design requirements relating to a device are appropriate and address the intended use of the device, including the needs of the user and patients.

These inputs shall include:- (a) functional, performance and safety requirements, according to the intended use;
(b) applicable statutory and regulatory requirements;
(c) where applicable, information derived from previous similar designs;
(d) other requirements essential for design and development; and (e) output(s) of risk management.

These inputs shall be reviewed for adequacy and approved by designated individual.
Requirements shall be complete, unambiguous and not in conflict with each other.

7.3.3 Design and development outputs:
The outputs of design and development shall be provided in a form that enables verification against the design and development input and shall be documented, reviewed, and approved prior to release.

Design and development outputs shall:- (a) meet the input requirements for design and development;
(b) provide appropriate information for purchasing, production and for service provision;
(c) contain or reference product acceptance criteria; and (d) specify the characteristics of the product that are essential for its safe and proper use.

Records of the design and development outputs shall be maintained.
Records of design and development outputs can include specifications, manufacturing procedures, engineering drawings, and engineering or research logbooks.

7.3.4 Design and development review:
At suitable stages, systematic reviews of design and development shall be performed in accordance with planned arrangements:- (a) to evaluate the ability of the results of design and development to meet requirements; and (b) to identify any problems and propose necessary actions.

Participants in such reviews shall include representatives of functions concerned with the design and development stage being reviewed, as well as other specialist personnel.
Records of the results of the reviews and any necessary actions shall be maintained

7.3.5 Design and development verification:
Verification shall be performed in accordance with planned arrangements to ensure that the design and development outputs have met the design and development input requirements. Records of the results of the verification and any necessary actions shall be maintained.

7.3.6 Design and development validation:
Design and development validation shall be performed in accordance with planned arrangements to ensure that the resulting product is capable of meeting the requirements for the specified application or intended use.
Design validation shall be performed under defined operating conditions on initial production units, lots, or batches or their equivalence. Design validation shall include software validation and risk analysis, where appropriate validation shall be completed prior to the delivery or implementation of the product.

Records of the results of validation and any necessary actions shall be maintained.

As part of design and development validation, the manufacturer shall perform clinical evaluations and/or evaluation of performance of the medical device or In-vitro Diagnostics.

NOTE 1.- If a medical device or In-vitro Diagnostic can only be validated following assembly and installation at point of use, delivery is not considered to be complete until the product has been formally transferred to the customer.

NOTE 2.- Provision of the medical device for purposes of clinical evaluations and/or evaluation of performance is not considered to be delivery.

7.3.7 Control of design and development changes:
Design and development changes shall be identified and records maintained. The changes shall be reviewed, verified and validated, as appropriate, and approved before implementation. The review of design and development changes shall include evaluation of the effect of the changes on constituent parts and product already delivered. Records of the results of the review of changes and any necessary actions shall be maintained.

Note.-Each manufacturer shall establish and maintain a Design History File for each type of device.
The Design History File shall contain or reference the records necessary to demonstrate that the design was developed in accordance with the approved design plan and the requirements of design and development.

7.4 Purchasing.-
7.4.1 Purchasing process:
The manufacturer organisation shall establish documented procedures to ensure that purchased product conforms to specified purchase requirements. The type and extent of control applied to the supplier and the purchased product shall be dependent upon the effect of the purchased product on subsequent product realisation or the final product.

The manufacturer shall evaluate and select suppliers based on their ability to supply product in accordance with the manufacturer‘s requirements. Criteria for selection, evaluation and re-evaluation shall be established.

Records of the results of evaluations and any necessary actions arising from the evaluation shall be maintained.

7.4.2 Purchasing information:
Purchasing information shall describe the product to be purchased, including where appropriate:- (a) requirements for approval of product, procedures, processes and equipment;
(b) requirements for qualification of personnel; and (c) quality management system requirements.

The manufacturer shall ensure the adequacy of specified purchase requirements prior to their communication to the supplier.

To the extent required for traceability, the manufacturer shall maintain documents and records of relevant purchasing information.

7.4.3 Verification of purchased product:
The manufacturer shall establish and implement the inspection or other activities necessary for ensuring that purchased product meets specified purchase requirements. Where the manufacturer intends to perform verification at the supplier‘s premises, the manufacturer shall state the intended verification arrangements and method of product release in the purchasing information. Records of the verification shall be maintained.

7.5 Production and service provision.-
7.5.1 Control of production and service provision:
7.5.1.1 General requirements:
The manufacturer shall plan and carry out production and service provision under controlled conditions. Controlled conditions shall include, as applicable:- (a) the availability of information that describes the characteristics of the product,

(b) the availability of documented procedures, documented requirements, work instructions; and reference materials and reference measurement procedures as necessary;
(c) the use of suitable equipment;
(d) the availability and use of monitoring and measuring devices;
(e) the implementation of monitoring and measurement;
(f) the implementation of release, delivery and post-delivery activities; and

(g) the implementation of defined operations for labeling and packaging.

The manufacturer shall establish and maintain a record for each batch of medical device or In-vitro Diagnostic devices that provides traceability and identifies the amount manufactured and amount approved for distribution. The batch record shall be verified and approved.

7.5.1.2 Control of production and service provision — Specific requirements
7.5.1.2.1 Cleanliness of product and contamination control:
The manufacturer shall establish documented requirements for cleanliness of product if:- (a) product is cleaned by the manufacturer prior to sterilisation or its use; or (b) product is supplied non-sterile to be subjected to a cleaning process prior to sterilisation or its use; or (c) product is supplied to be used non-sterile and its cleanliness is of significance in use; or (d) process agents are to be removed from product during manufacture.

If the product is cleaned in accordance with (a) or (b) above, the requirements content in clause 6.4 (a) and (b) do not apply prior to the cleaning process

7.5.1.2.2 Installation activities:
If appropriate, the manufacturer shall establish documented requirements which contain acceptance criteria for installing and verifying the installation of the medical device or In-vitro Diagnostic device.
If the agreed customer requirements allow installation to be performed other than by manufacturer or its authorised agent, the manufacturer shall provide documented requirements for installation and verification. Records of installation and verification performed by the manufacturer or its authorized agent shall be maintained.

7.5.1.3 Particular requirements for sterile medical devices:
The manufacturer shall maintain records of the process parameters for the sterilisation process which was used for each sterilisation batch. Sterilisation records shall be traceable to each production batch of medical device.

7.5.2 Validation of processes for production and service provision.-
7.5.2.1 General:
The manufacturer shall validate any processes for production and service provision where the resulting output cannot be verified by subsequent monitoring or measurement. This includes any processes where deficiencies become apparent only after the product is in use. Validation shall demonstrate the ability of these processes to achieve planned results.

The manufacturer shall establish arrangements for these processes including, as applicable:- (a) defined criteria for review and approval of the processes;
(b) approval of equipment and qualification of personnel (c) use of specific methods and procedures,;
(d) requirements for records; and (e) revalidation.

The manufacturer shall establish documented procedures for the validation of the application of computer software (and its changes to such software or its application) for production and service provision that affect the ability of the product conform to specified requirements. Such software applications shall be validated prior to initial use.
Records of validation shall be maintained.

7.5.2.2 Particular requirements for sterile medical devices:
The manufacturer shall establish documented procedures for the validation of sterilization processes.
Sterilisation processes shall be validated prior to initial use. The records of validation of each sterilisation process shall be maintained.

7.5.3 Identification and traceability.-
7.5.3.1 Identification:
The manufacturer shall identify the product by suitable means throughout product realization, and shall establish documented procedures for such product identification. The manufacturer shall establish documented procedures to ensure that medical devices and In-vitro Diagnostics returned to the manufacturer are identified and distinguished from conforming product.

7.5.3.2 Traceability.-
7.5.3.2.1 General:
The manufacturer shall establish documented procedures for traceability. Such procedures shall define the extent of product traceability and the records required.

Where traceability is a requirement, the manufacturer shall control and record the unique identification of the product.

NOTE.- Configuration management is a means by which identification and traceability can be maintained.

7.5.3.2.2 Particular requirements for active implantable medical devices and implantable medical devices:

In defining the records required for traceability, the manufacturer shall include records of all components, materials and work environment conditions, if these could cause the medical device not to satisfy its specified requirements.

The manufacturer shall require that its agents or distributors maintain records of the distribution of active implantable medical devices and implantable medical devices to allow traceability and that such records are available for inspection. Records of the name and address of the shipping package consignee shall be maintained.

7.5.3.3 Status identification:

The manufacturer shall identify the product status with respect to monitoring and measurement requirements. The identification of product status shall be maintained throughout production, storage, implant, usage and installation of the product to ensure that only product that has passed the required inspections and tests (or released under an authorized concession) is dispatched, used or installed.

7.5.4 Customer property:
The manufacturer shall exercise care with customer property while it is under the manufacturer‘s control or being used by the manufacturer. The manufacturer shall identify, verify, protect and safeguard customer property provided for use or incorporation into the product. If any customer property is lost, damaged or otherwise found to be unsuitable for use, this shall be reported to the customer and records maintained.

NOTE.- Customer property can include intellectual property or confidential health information.

7.5.5 Preservation of product:
The manufacturer shall establish documented procedures or documented work instructions for preserving the conformity of product during internal processing and delivery to the intended destination. This preservation shall include identification, handling, packaging, storage and protection. Preservation shall also apply to the constituent parts of a product.

The manufacturer shall establish documented procedures or documented work instructions for the control of product with a limited shelf-life or requiring special storage conditions. Such special storage conditions shall be controlled and recorded.

7.6 Control of monitoring and measuring devices:

The manufacturer shall determine the monitoring and measurement to be undertaken and the monitoring and measuring devices needed to provide evidence of conformity of product to determined requirements.

The manufacturer shall establish documented procedures to ensure that monitoring and measurement can be carried out and are carried out in a manner that is consistent with the monitoring and measurement requirements.

Where necessary to ensure valid results, measuring equipment shall be:- (a) calibrated or verified at specified intervals, or prior to use, against measurement standards traceable to Bureau of Indian Standards wherever available ; where no such standards exist, the basis used for calibration or verification shall be recorded;
(b) adjusted or re-adjusted as necessary;
(c) identified to enable the calibration status to be determined;
(d) safeguarded from adjustments that would invalidate the measurement result;
(e) protected from damage and deterioration during handling, maintenance and storage.

In addition, the manufacturer shall assess and record the validity of the previous measuring results when the equipment is found not to conform to requirements. The manufacturer shall take appropriate action on the equipment and any product affected. Records of the results of calibration and verification shall be maintained.

When used in the monitoring and measurement of specified requirements, the ability of computer software to satisfy the intended application shall be confirmed. This shall be undertaken prior to initial use and reconfirmed as necessary.

8 Measurement, analysis and improvement.-
8.1 General:
The manufacturer shall plan and implement the monitoring, measurement, analysis and improvement processes needed:- (a) to demonstrate conformity of the product;
(b) to ensure conformity of the quality management system; and (c) to maintain the effectiveness of the quality management system.

This shall include determination of applicable methods, including statistical techniques, and the extent of their use.

Note.- If relevant Indian standards are not available, International standards are applicable. In case no Indian or International standards are available, validated testing process of the manufacturer is applicable.

8.2 Monitoring and measurement.-
8.2.1 Feedback:
As one of the measurements of the performance of the quality management system, the manufacturer shall monitor information relating to whether the manufacturer has met customer or regulatory requirements. The methods for obtaining and using this information shall be determined.

The manufacturer shall establish a documented procedure for a feedback system to provide early warning of quality problems and for input into the corrective and preventive action processes.

8.2.2 Internal audit:
The manufacturer shall conduct internal audits at planned intervals to determine whether the quality management system:- a) conforms to the planned arrangements, to the requirements of this schedule and to the quality management system requirements established by the manufacturer, and b) is effectively implemented and maintained.

An audit programme shall be planned, taking into consideration the status and importance of the processes and areas to be audited, as well as the results of previous audits. The audit criteria, scope, frequency and methods shall be defined. Selection of auditors and conduct of audits shall ensure objectivity and impartiality of the audit process. Auditors shall not audit their own work.

The responsibilities and requirements for planning and conducting audits, and for reporting results and maintaining records shall be defined in a documented procedure. The management responsible for the area being audited shall ensure that actions are taken without undue delay to eliminate detected nonconformities and their causes. Follow-up activities shall include the verification of the actions taken and the reporting of verification results.

8.2.3 Monitoring and measurement of processes:
The manufacturer shall apply suitable methods for monitoring and, where applicable, measurement of the quality management system processes. These methods shall demonstrate the ability of the processes to achieve planned results. When planned results are not achieved, correction and corrective action shall be taken, as appropriate, to ensure conformity of the product.

8.2.4 Monitoring and measurement of product.-
8.2.4.1 General requirements:

The manufacturer shall monitor and measure the characteristics of the product to verify that product requirements have been met. This shall be carried out at appropriate stages of the product realisation process in accordance with the planned arrangements and documented procedures.

Evidence of conformity with the acceptance criteria shall be maintained. Records shall indicate the person(s) authorizing release of product. Product release shall not proceed until the planned arrangements have been satisfactorily completed.

8.2.4.2 Particular requirement for active implantable medical devices and implantable medical Devices wherever applicable:
The manufacturer shall record the identity of personnel performing any inspection or testing.

8.3 Control of nonconforming product The manufacturer shall ensure that product which does not conform to product requirements is identified and controlled to prevent its unintended use or delivery. The controls and related responsibilities and authorities for dealing with nonconforming product shall be defined in a documented procedure.

The manufacturer shall deal with nonconforming product by one or more of the following ways:
(a) by taking action to eliminate the detected nonconformity;
(b) by authorizing its use, release or acceptance under concession;
(c) by taking action to preclude its original intended use or application.

The manufacturer shall ensure that nonconforming product is accepted by concession only if regulatory requirements are met. Records of the identity of the person authorisng the concession shall be maintained.

Records of the nature of nonconformities and any subsequent actions taken, including concessions obtained, shall be maintained.

When nonconforming product is corrected it shall be subject to re-verification to demonstrate conformity to the requirements. When nonconforming product is detected after delivery or use has started, the manufacturer shall take action appropriate to the effects, or potential effects, of the nonconformity.

If product needs to be reworked (one or more times), the manufacturer shall document the rework process in a work instruction that has undergone the same authorisation and approval procedure as the original work instruction. Prior to authorisation and approval of the work instruction, a determination of any adverse effect of the rework upon product shall be made and documented.

8.4 Analysis of data:
The manufacturer shall establish documented procedures to determine, collect and analyze appropriate data to demonstrate the suitability and effectiveness of the quality management system and to evaluate whether improvement of the effectiveness of the quality management system can be made.

This shall include data generated as a result of monitoring and measurement and from other relevant sources.

The analysis of data shall provide information relating to:- (a) feedback (b) conformity to product requirements;
(c) characteristics and trends of processes and products including opportunities for preventive action; and (d) suppliers.

Records of the results of the analysis of data shall be maintained.

8.5 Improvement.-
8.5.1 General:
The manufacturer shall identify and implement any changes necessary to ensure and maintain the continued suitability and effectiveness of the quality management system through the use of the quality policy, quality objectives, audit results, analysis of data, corrective and preventive actions and management review.

The manufacturer shall establish documented procedures for the issue and implementation of advisory notices. These procedures shall be capable of being implemented at any time. Records of all customer complaint investigations shall be maintained. If investigation determine that the activities outside the manufacturer‘s organisation contributed to the customer complaint, relevant information shall be exchanged between the organisations involved.

If any customer complaint is not followed by corrective or preventive action, the reason shall be recorded and approved. Manufacturer shall notify the adverse event to the regulatory authority and establish documented procedures for the same.

8.5.2 Corrective action:

The manufacturer shall take action to eliminate the cause of nonconformities in order to prevent recurrence. Corrective actions shall be appropriate to the effects of the nonconformities encountered.
A documented procedure shall be established to define requirements for:- (a) reviewing nonconformities (including customer complaints);
(b) determining the causes of nonconformities;
(c) evaluating the need for action to ensure that nonconformities do not recur (d) determining and implementing action needed, including, if appropriate, updating documentation;
(e) recording of the results of any investigation and of action taken; and (f) reviewing the corrective action taken and its effectiveness.

8.5.3 Preventive action:

The manufacturer shall determine action to eliminate the causes of potential nonconformities in order to prevent their occurrence. Preventive actions shall be appropriate to the effects of the potential problems. A documented procedure shall be established to define requirements for

(a) determining potential nonconformities and their causes, (b) evaluating the need for action to prevent occurrence of nonconformities, (c) determining and implementing action needed, (d) recording of the results of any investigations and of action taken, and (e) reviewing preventive action taken and its effectiveness.

Annexure ̳A‘ (refer para 4.2.1) The manufacturer shall prepare a succinct document in the form of Device Master File containing specific information about the device manufacturing in the premises.

1.0 Executive Summary:
An executive summary shall be provided by the manufacturer and shall contain:
Introductory descriptive information on the medical device or In-vitro Diagnostics, the intended use and indication for use, Class of Device, novel features of the device (if any), shelf life of the device and a synopsis on the content of the dossier information regarding sterilisation of the device (whether it is sterile or non-sterile; if sterile, mode of sterilisation)

2.0 Device Description And Product Specification, Including Variants And Accessories:
2.1 Device Description
2.2 Product Specification
2.3 Reference to predicate and/or previous generations of the device

3.0 Labelling

4.0 Design And Manufacturing Information:
4.1 Device Design
4.2 Manufacturing Processes

5.0 Essential Principles (EP) Checklist

6.0 Risk Analysis And Control Summary

7.0 Product Verification And Validation:
7.1 Biocompatibility
7.2 Medicinal Substances
7.3 Biological Safety
7.4 Sterilisation
7.5 Software Verification and Validation
7.6 Animal Studies
7.7 Shelf Life/Stability Data
7.8 Clinical Evidence
7.9 Post Marketing Surveillance Data (Vigilance Reporting)

8. Additional information in case of the diagnostic kits:
Product dossier showing the:

8.1 The details of source antigen or antibody as the case may be and characterization of the same.
Process control of coating of antigen or antibody on the base material like Nitrocellulose paper, strips or cards or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) wells etc.

Detailed composition of the kit and manufacturing flow chart process of the kit showing the specific flow diagram of individual components or source of the individual components.

8.2 Test protocol of the kit showing the specifications and method of testing. In house evaluation report of sensitivity, specificity and stability studies.
8.3 The detailed test report of all the components used/packed in the finished kit.
8.4 Pack size and labelling.
8.5 Product inserts.

Specific evaluation report, if done by any laboratory in India, showing the sensitivity and specificity of the kit.

Specific processing like safe handling, material control, area control, process control, and stability studies, storage at quarantine stage and finished stage, packaging should be highlighted in the product dossier.

Annexure `B` (refer para 4.2.2)

The manufacturer shall prepare a succinct document in the form of Plant Master File containing specific information about the production and/or control of device manufacturing carried out at the premises. It shall contain the following information:

1. General Information:
(i) brief information on the site (including name and address), relation to other sites;
(ii) manufacturing activities;
(iii) any other operations carried out on the site (iv) name and exact address of the site, including telephone, fax numbers, web site URL and e-mail address;
(v) type of medical devices handled on the site and information about specifically toxic or hazardous substances handled, mentioning the way they are handled and precautions taken;
(vi) short description of the site (size, location and immediate environment and other activities on the site);
(vii) number of employees engaged in Production, Quality Control, warehousing, and distribution;
(viii) use of outside scientific, analytical or other technical assistance in relation to the design, manufacture and testing;
(ix) short description of the quality management system of the company;
(x) devices details registered with foreign countries;

2. Personnel:
(i) organisation chart showing the arrangements for key personne;l (ii) qualifications, experience and responsibilities of key personnel;
(iii) outline of arrangements for basic and in-service training and how records are maintained;
(iv) health requirements for personnel engaged in production (v) personnel hygiene requirements, including clothing.

3. Premises and Facilities:
(i) layout of premises with indication of scale;
(ii) nature of construction, finishes/fixtures and fittings;
(iii) brief description of ventilation systems. More details should be given for critical areas with potential risks of airborne contamination (including schematic drawings of the systems). Classification of the rooms used for the manufacture of sterile products should be mentioned;
(iv) special areas for the handling of highly toxic, hazardous and sensitizing materials;

(v) brief description of water systems (schematic drawings of the systems are desirable) including sanitation;
(vi) maintenance (description of planned preventive maintenance programmes for premises and recording system);

4. Equipment:
(i) Brief description of major production and quality control laboratories equipment (a list of the equipment is required);
(ii) maintenance (description of planned preventive maintenance programmes and recording system);
(iii) qualification and calibration, including the recording system. Arrangements for computerized systems validation.
5. Sanitation:
Availability of written specifications and procedures for cleaning the manufacturing areas and equipments.

6. Production:
(i) Brief description of production operations using, wherever possible, flow sheets and charts specifying important parameters ;
(ii) arrangements for the handling of starting materials, packaging materials, bulk and finished products, including sampling, quarantine, release and storage;
(iii) arrangements for reprocessing or rework;
(iv) arrangements for the handling of rejected materials and products;
(v) brief description of general policy for process validation.

7. Quality Assurance:
Description of the Quality Assurance system and of the activities of the Quality Assurance Department. Procedures for the release of finished products.

8. Storage:
Policy on the storage of medical device.

9. Documentation:
Arrangements for the preparation, revision and distribution of necessary documentation, including storage of master documents.

10. Medical Device Complaints and Field Safety Corrective Action:
(i) Arrangements for the handling of complaints ;
(ii) Arrangements for the handling of field safety corrective action

11. Internal Audit:
Short Description of the internal audit system.

12. Contract Activities:
Description of the way in which the compliance of the contract acceptor is assessed.

Annexure ̳C‘ Environmental requirement for Notified medical devices and in-vitro diagnostics

Name of Device Type of Operation ISO Class (At rest) Cardiac stent/Drug Eluting Stent

Primary Packing and Crimping

Washing, Ultrasonic cleaning &Drug coating

Assembly, Wrapping & Packaging

Laser cutting, Descaling, Annealing & Electro polishing

Heart Valves

Valve Packing

Ultrasonic Cleaning & Visual Inspection

Frame & Disc Assembly

Intra Ocular Lenses Packing & Sealing

Final Inspection

Power Checking& Final Cleaning

Tumble Polishing & Lathe Cutting

Bone Cements Final Product Filling

Sieving & Calcinations

Powder Preparation, Granulation &Drying

Internal Prosthetic Replacement Packing

Product Preparation

Component Preparation

Orthopedic Implants Polishing &Cleaning & packaging (to be sterilized in factory premises)

Polishing , cleaning & packaging (Non Sterile- to be sterilized in Hospital)

Cutting, lathing

Catheters /Ablation Device / I V Cannulae / Scalp Vein Set/ Hypodermic Syringes/ Hypodermic Needles / Perfusion Sets Assembly, Coating, Wrapping & Packing

Component Preparation & Cleaning

Moulding

Condom Compounding Well ventilated area with minimum 5 micron filter Moulding Well ventilated area with minimum 5 micron filter Vulcanising Normal air Packing Air conditioned Intra Uterine Devices Moulding Well ventilated area with minimum 5 micron filter Assembling

Packaging

Tubal ring Extrusion

Cutting and Assembly

Packaging

Blood bags Moulding/Extrusion of components

Assembly

Filing

Suture Extrusion

Assembly

Packing

Staplers Staple formation

Staple assembly

Staple final pack

Ligatures Extrusion

Cutting and assembly

Final Pack

Surgical dressings Weaving

Assembly and Gauzing

Final pack

In-vitro diagnostics Kit/Reagents Dry, Liquid Reagent Preparation Well Lighted and Ventilated controlled temperature & humidity as per process or product requirement Coating of sheets etc.
Assembly and primary packing Filling Well Lighted and Ventilated controlled temperature and humidity as per process or product requirement. Provision of Laminar hood if required, Clean Room class 8 or class 9 as per product/process requirement Secondary Packing Well Lighted and Ventilated controlled temperature if required Storage As per recommended storage condition of the product].

1[SCHEDULE N

[See Rule 64(1)]

LIST OF MINIMUM EQUIPMENT FOR THE EFFICIENT RUNNING
OF A PHARMACY

1. Entrance. - The front of a pharmacy shall bear an inscription ―Pharmacy‖ in front.

2. Premises. - The premises of a pharmacy shall be separated from rooms for private use. The premises shall be well built, dry, well lit and ventilated and, of sufficient dimensions to allow the goods in stock, especially medicaments and poisons to be kept in a clearly visible and appropriate manner. The areas of the section to be used as dispensing department shall be not less than 6 square meters for one pharmacist working therein with additional 2 square meters for each additional pharmacist. The height of the premises shall be at least 2.5 meters.

The floor of the pharmacy shall be smooth and washable. The walls shall be plastered or tiled or oil painted so as to maintain smooth, durable and washable surface devoid of holes, cracks and crevices.

A pharmacy shall be provided with ample supply of good quality water.

The dispensing department shall be separated by a barrier to prevent the admission of the public.

3. Furniture and apparatus. - The furniture and apparatus of a pharmacy shall be adopted to the uses for which they are intended and correspond to the size and requirements of the establishment.

Drugs, chemicals, and medicaments shall be kept in a room appropriate to their properties and in such special containers as will prevent any deterioration of the contents or of contents of containers kept near them. Drawers, glasses and other containers used for keeping medicaments shall be of suitable size and capable of being closed tightly to prevent the entry of dust.

Every container shall bear a label of appropriate size, easily readable with names of medicaments as given in the Pharmacopoeias.

A pharmacy shall be provided with a dispensing bench, the top of which shall be covered with washable and impervious material like stainless steel, laminated or plastic, etc.

A pharmacy shall be provided with a cupboard with lock and key for the storage of poisons and shall be clearly marked with the work ̳POISON‘ in red letters on a white background.

Containers of all concentrated solution shall bear special label or marked with the words ―To be diluted‖.

A Pharmacy shall be provided with the following minimum apparatus and books necessary for making of official preparations and prescriptions:-

1.Subs. by S.O.2139 , dt. 12.8.1972.

Apparatus: -

Books :
Balance, dispensing, sensitivity 30 mg.
Balance, counter, capacity 3 Kgm., sensitivity 1 gm.
Beakers, lipped, assorted sizes.
Bottles, prescription, ungraduated assorted sizes.
Corks assorted sizes and tapers.
Cork, extracter.
Evaporating dishes, porcelain.
Filter paper.
Funnels, glass.
Litmas paper, blue and red.
Measure glasses cylindrical 10 ml, 25 ml, 100 ml and 500 ml.
Mortars and pestles, glass.
Mortars and pestles, wedgwood.
Ointment pots with bakelite or suitable caps.
Ointment slab, porcelain Pipette graduated, 2 ml, 5 ml and 10 ml.
Ring, stand (retort) iron, complete with rings.
Rubber stamps and pad Scissors Spatulas, rubber or vulcanite Spatulas, stainless steel.
Spirit lamp Glass stirring rods.
Thermometer, 0oC to 200oC.
Tripod stand.
Watch glasses.
Water bath.
Water distillation still in case Eye drops and Eye lotions are prepared.
Weights, Metric, 1 mg. to 100 gm.
Wire Gauze.
*Pill finisher, boxwood.
* Pill Machine.
* Pill Boxes.
* Suppository mould.

The Indian Pharmacopoeia (Current Edition).
National Formulary of Indian (Current Edition).
The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
The Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.
The Pharmacy Act, 1948.
The Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930.

4. General provisions. - A pharmacy shall be conducted under the continuous personal supervision of a Registered Pharmacist whose name shall be displayed conspicuously in the premises.

The Pharmacist shall always put on clean white overalls.

The premises and fittings of the pharmacy shall be properly kept and everything shall be in good order and clean.

All records and registers shall be maintained in accordance with the laws in force.

Any container taken from the poison cupboard shall be replaced therein immediately after use and the cupboard locked. The keys of the poison cupboard shall be kept in the personal custody of the responsible person.

Medicaments when supplied shall have labels conforming to the provisions of laws in force.

Note: - The above requirements are subject to modifications at the discretion of the licensing authority, if he is of opinion that having regard to the nature of drugs dispensed, compounded or prepared by the licensee. It is necessary to relax the above requirements or to impose additional requirements in the circumstances of a particular case. The decision of the licensing authority in that regard shall be final.

* These items are to be provided only by those who intend to dispense pills or suppositories, as the case may be.]

1[SCHEDULE O [See Rule 126]

STANDARD FOR DISINFECTANT FLUIDS 2[PART I

PROVISION APPLICABLE TO BLACK FLUIDS AND WHITE FLUIDS

The standards for disinfectants shall conform to the Indian Standards specification (IS 1061:1997) laid down from time to time by the Bureau of Indian Standards.]

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 1243, dared 19-09-1979, for Schedule O (w.e.f. 6-10-979). EARLIER Schedule O was added y Notification No. F.1-20/60-D, dated 24-01-1964.
2. Subs. by G.S.R. 735(E), dated 21-12-2005, for ―PART I

Provision applicable to Black Fluids and White Fluids
1.Classification - The disinfectants shall be classified as follows: - (a) Black fluids (b) White fluids

(A) Black fluids.– These shall be homogeneous dark brown solution of coal tar acid or similar acids derived from petroleum with or without hydrocarbon, and/or other phenolic compounds, and their derivatives and a suitable emulsifier.

(B) White fluids.– These shall be finely dispersed homogeneous white to off- white emulsion consisting of coal tar acids or similar acids derived from petroleum, with or without hydrocarbons, and/or other phenolic compounds, and their derivatives.

2.Gradation – Each of the above classes of disinfectant fluids shall be graded on the basis of the minimum requirements in respect of:

Rideal Walker (RW) Coefficient as follows: -

Grade Rideal Walker (RW) Coefficient (Minimum)

1. 18

2. 10

3. 5

3.Type - Each of the above grades of disinfectant fluids shall be stable in the range of temperature indicated against each type. -

Type Stable in the range of (I) Normal 15o C to 45o C.
(II) Winter 5 o C to 30 o C

4.Requirements - All classes and grades of disinfectant fluids shall comply with the following requirements, namely: -

(1) Stability after dilution - When tested by the method described hereinafter the disinfectant fluid shall be miscible with artificial hard water (for Black fluids) or with artificial sea water (for White fluids) in all proportion from 1 per cent to 5 per cent by volume, to give

emulsion which shall not break or show more than traces of separation of either top or bottom oil when kept for 6 hours at 15o C to 45o C for Type (I) (Normal) and 5o C to 30o C for Type (II) (Winter).
(2) Germicidal Value.– Rideal Walker Coefficient – Black fluids and White fluids shall be tested for determination of Rideal Walker Coefficient (R.W.Coefficient) by the method described hereinafter.
(3) Storage.– Disinfectant fluids of all classes shall be stored in mild steel, tinned mild steel or other suitable containers. These shall not be stored in containers made of galvanized iron.
(4) Labelling. -Subject to the other provisions in these rules, the label on the container shall state- (i) the name of the product,

(ii) the name and full address of the manufacturer, (iii) grade, type, R.W. Coefficient of product, (iv) date of manufacture,

(v) quantity present in the container, (vi) indications and mode of use, and (vii) date up to which the product can be used.

5.Method of testing - (1) Preparation of sample - The sample of disinfectant fluid to be tested should be mixed thoroughly taking care that no air is beaten into the fluid immediately before withdrawing any portion for testing. The rest portion should be withdrawn from the middle of the sample.
(2) Method of resting stability after dilution. - (a) Preparation of Artificial Hard Water: 40 ml of I N Hydrochloric Acid (Analytical Reagent Quality) is neutralized with a slight excess of Calcium Carbonate and filtered. The filtrate is diluted to 1000 ml with distilled water, 10 parts of this solution is further diluted to 100 parts with distilled water.
(b) Preparation of Artificial Sea Water: 27G of Sodium Chloride (Analytical Reagent Quality) and 5 G of Magnesium Sulphate (Analytical Reagent Quality) are dissolved in distilled water and diluted to 1000 ml. The solution is filtered before use.
(c) Procedure: Take 1 ml and 5 ml portions of the sample in duplicate in 100 ml stoppered measuring cylinder (IS: 878 – 1956) by means of pipettes. Dilute the sample with artificial Hard water or Artificial Sea water (as the case may be) upto 10 ml mark. Mix thoroughly by inverting the cylinders 5 times. Keep the cylinders containing the diluted fluids for 6 hours at the extremes of the temperature range specified for the particular type. The sample complies with the test if the solution shows not more than a trace of separation at its top and bottom.

(3) Method of determination of Rideal Walker Coefficient (R.W.C)-

Apparatus – A loop, 4 mm in internal diameter is made at the end of 28 swg (0.376 mm) wire of platinum or platinum iridium alloy, 38 mm long from the loop to the holder. The loop is bent at such an angle to the length of the wire as will facilitate in removal vertically from the surface of the liquid while keeping the place of the loop horizontal.
Incubator – Set and maintained at 37o C ± 1o C Pipettes – Standard graduated pipettes of capacity 10 ml; 5 ml and 1 ml Dropping Pipette – Made of delivery 0.2 ml Medication tubes – 5 sterile plugged rimless test tubes 125 mm x 22 mm (5 inch x 3⁄4 inch) made of hard neutral glass.
Both tubes – About 2 dozens of the same description as medication tubes.

Standard measuring cylinders stopped and graduated—500 ml graduated in 10 ml–;one 100 ml graduated 1 ml– five. All apparatus must be scrupulously clean and sterile; immediately before use.

Reagents– (a) Broth.– Prepare a mixture of the following ingredients:
Meat extract (Microbiological grade) 20 g Peptone (Micro biological grade) 20g. Sodium Chloride (Regent Quality) 10 g Distilled Water- 1000 ml.

Dissolve the solids in distilled water. Add sufficient sodium hydroxide to neutralize the solution; then boil it to bring down phosphates and filter while hot. The broth thus prepared is then adjusted to pH 7.6 with normal Hydrochloric acid. The broth is then sterilized by autoclaving at 15 lbs pressure for 20 minutes. It is then filtered and placed in 5 ml quantities in sterilized broth tubes. The tubes of media thus prepared are sterilized by autoclaving at 15 lbs pressure for 10 minutes. The final pH of the medium should lie between 7.3 and 7.5. Further resterilization in bulk or in tubes is not permissible.

(b) Test Organism- Test organism used is Salmonella typhi (NCTC 786) of which suitable culture shall be obtained from the Director, Central Drugs Laboratory, Calcutta. This culture is maintained by weekly sub-culture on a nutrient agar slope (made by dissolving 2.5 per cent Agar Agar (Bacteriological grade) in broth prepared as above), incubating the sub- culture for 24 hours at 37O C and then storing in refrigerator at a temperature below 22o C. For the purpose of the test a little of the growth from the most recent sub-culture in nutrient agar slope is placed in tube of R.W.
broth and incubated for 23 hours at 38o C. A standard loopful is then transferred to a second tube and incubated as before. This is done at least three times before a test is carried out. Sub-culturing in broth is limited to 14 days.

(c) Standard phenol: 5 per cent W/V solution in sterile distilled water of chemically pure phenol having a crystallizing point of not less than 40.5oC is prepared. Test dilutions are prepared from this stock solution containing 1 g of phenol in each 95, 100, 105, 115 ml of the solution made.
These dilutions shall be used within a week of preparation.

(d) Test dilutions of Disinfectant (sample)- The sample is prepared as described under ―Preparation of samples‖. A test portion of 5 ml is withdrawn and discharged into about 480 ml of sterile distilled water in a 500 ml glass stoppered sterile measuring cylinder and the pipette is rinsed three times or more in the clear liquid. The whole is then made up to 500 ml with sterile distilled water, the cylinder is stoppered and the contents thoroughly mixed by inverting the cylinder several times. Suitable test dilutions in sterile distilled water are then immediately prepared from this stock solution.

Procedure: 5 ml of 4 chosen dilutions of the disinfectant are placed in 4 medication tubes which are then placed in a rack provided with water bath maintained at a constant temperature between 17o C and 19o C, with the strongest dilution on the left. The fifth medication tube containing 5 ml of the particular phenol dilution is placed on the right. When the content on the medication tubes and broth culture of the test organism have reached the temperature of the water bath, starting at Zero time, 0.2 ml of the culture is added to the left hand medication tube and the tube is shaken gently. After 30 seconds the next tube is inoculated similarly and the process is repeated with each successive tube at intervals of 30 seconds until the phenol control has been inoculated. Thirty seconds after this last addition (that is 2-1/2 minutes from zero) a loopful of the well-shaken content of the tube at the extreme left is withdrawn and placed in tube containing 5 ml of the broth medium. Thirty seconds after this similar operation is performed on the second medication tube. The procedure is repeated at an interval of 30 seconds with each of the 5 medication tubes working from left to right until 4 sets of cultures have been made i.e. at 2-1/2, 5, 7-1/2 and 10 minutes respectively after exposure. In each withdrawal care should

be taken to ensure that the loop is removed vertically from the surface of the liquid with its plane horizontally and without touching the side of the test tubes. The loop shall be sterilized by flaming between each operation, care being taken that the loop is cooled before being again used.
The inoculated broth tubes are incubated for not less than 48 hours and not more than 72 hours at 37o C when the tubes showing growth of the test organisms will be recognized by turbidity of the broth.

Calculation of Coefficient – The R.W. Coefficient is obtained by dividing that dilution of the disinfectant which shows life of test organism in 2-1/2 and 5 minutes but no life thereafter by that dilution of the phenol which gives the same response.A typical set of sample is given below:

Sample disinfectant Time of exposures in minutes Dilutions 21⁄2 5 71⁄2 10

1:1000 − − − − 1:1100 + − − − R.W. Coefficient 1:1200 + + − . − = 1200 = 12 1:1300 1:100 Pheno control + + + + + − − −

(+ = growth − = No growth)

PART II

Provisions applicable to other disinfectant fluids:

Disinfectant fluids which are made with chemicals other than those specified under Part I of this Schedule shall conform to the formula or list of ingredients shown on the label.

Labelling : Subject to the provisions of rules on labelling, the label of container shall state:

(i) the name of the product;

(ii) the name and full address of the manufacturer;

(iii) the full formula or list of ingredients of the preparation;

(iv) date of manufacture;

(v) date up to which the product can be used;

(vi) quantity present in the container; and

(vii) indications and mode of use.
Cautionary note:

Mercury compounds shall be strictly excluded from all grades.]

1[SCHEDULE P

[See Rule 96]

LIFE PERIOD OF DRUGS

Sl.
No.

Name of the drug Period in months (unless otherwise

specified) between date of manufacture and date of expiry which the labelled potency period of the drug shall not exceed under the conditions of storage specified in Column No.4

Condition of storage

1 2 3 4

ANTIBIOTICS Adramycin

In a cool place Ampicillin

In a cool place Ampicillin Capsules

Ampicillin Dry Syrup

Ampicillin Injection

Ampicillin Sodium

In a cool place Ampicillin Trihydrate

In a cool place Amoxycillin Trihydrate

In a cool place

Amoxycillin Trihydrate Capsules

Amoxycillin Trihydrate Dry Syrup

Bacitracin

In a cool place Bacitracin or Zinc Bacitracin Tablets

Bacitracin Lozenges

Carbenicillin Sodium Injection

At temperature not Exceeding 5°C Carbenicillin Sodium Powder

At temperature not Exceeding 5°C Cephalexin

In a cool place Chloramphenicol

In a cool place Chloramphenicol Capsules & Tablets

Chloramphenicol Palmitate

Chloramphenicol Palmitate Oral Suspension

Chloramphenicol Eye drops

Chloramphenicol Sodium Succinate Powder

In a cool palace Chloramphenicol Sodium Succinate Injection

In a cool place

Chlortetracycline Hydrochloride

In a cool place Chlortetracycline Hydrochloride Capsules

Chlortetracycline Hydrochloride Tablets

Chlortetracycline Hydrochloride Ointment

Cloxacillin (Oral)

In a cool place Cloxacillin Sodium (Injection Grade)

In a cool place

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 17(E) , dt. 7.1.1986 ( w.e.f. 7.1.1986 ).

1 2 3 4 Colistin Sulphate

Protected from light D-Cycloserine

In a cool place Dimethyl Chlortetracycline Hydrochloride

Dimethyl Chlortetracycline Hydrochloride Capsules

Daunoblastin Injection.

Doxycycline Hydrochloride

In a cool place Doxcycline Monohydrate

In a cool place Doxycyline Monohydrate for Oral Suspension.

Doxycycline Monohydrate Capsules.

Erythromycin Estolate

In a cool place Erythromycin Ethylsuccinate

In a cool place Erythromycin Oral Suspension

Erythromycin Estolate for Oral Suspension

Erythromycin Ethyl Succinate Tablet

Erythromycin Estolate Tablets

Erythromycin Stearate

In a cool place Framycetin Sulphate

In a well closed container with temperature not exceeding 30°C Framycetin Sulphate Eye drops

In a well closed container with temperature not exceeding 30°C Framycetin Sulphate Ointment

In a well closed container with temperature not exceeding 30°C Gentamycin Sulphate

In a cool place.
Gentamycin Sulphate Injection

Gramicidin

In a cool place Griseofulvin

In a cool place Griseofulvin Tablets

Kanamycin Sulphate Injection.

Kanamycin Acid Sulphate Powder

In a cool place Mitomycin C

In a cool place Neomycin Sulphate.

In a cool place Nystatin

At temperature not exceeding 5°C Oleandomycin Phosphate sterile

In a cool place Oleandomycin Phosphate non sterile

In a cool place Oxytetracline Hydrochloride

In a cool place Oxytetracycline Hydrochloride Capsules.

Oxytetracycline Hydrochloride Tablets

Oxytetracycline Hydrochloride Injection

Oxytetracycline Hydrochloride Ointment

Penicillin Crystalline

In a cool place Penicillin Tablets

In a cool place
68. Procaine Penicillin G

In a cool place

1 2 3 4

Benzathin Penicillin G

Potassium Phenoxy Methyl Penicillin

In a cool place Potassium Phenoxy Methyl PenicillinTablets

Polymixin B Sulphate

In a cool place Polymixin B Sulphate Ointment or Powder

In a cool place Rifampicin

In a cool place 1[75 Rifampicin Capsules 36]

Spramycin Base

In a cool place Strepromycin Injection.

Streptomycin Ointment

Streptomycin Tablets

Streptomycin Sulphate

At temperature not exceeding 20oC Tetracycline Base

In a cool place Tetracycline Hydrochloride

In a cool place Tetracycline Hydrochloride Capsules

Tetracycline Tablets

Tyrothricin

In a cool place.

VITAMINS

Vitamin A Injection

Vitamin B1 Injection

Thiamine Mononitrate Tablets

Thiamine Hydrochloride

In a well closed container, protected from light, in a cool place.
Thiamine Mononitrate

In a well closed container, protected from light, in a cool place.
Riboflavin

In a well closed container, protected from light, in a cool place.
Riboflavin-5-Phosphate

In a well closed container, protected from light, in a cool place.
Riboflavin Tablets

Vitamin B2 Injection

Vitamin B6

In a well closed container, protected from light, in a cool place.
Vitamin B6 tablets

Cyanacobalamin

In a well closed container, protected from light, in a cool place.
Hydroxycobalamin

In a well closed container, protected from light, in a cool place.
Vitamin B12 Injection

Calcium Pantothenate

In a well closed container, protected from light, in a cool place.
Vitamin C Injection

Calcium Pantothenate Tablets

Vitamin C

In a well closed container, protected from light, in a cool place.

1 2 3 4

Vitamin D2 D3

In a well closed container, protected from light, in a cool place.
Vitamin E or E-Acetate

In a well closed container, protected from light, in a cool place.
Folic Acid

In a well closed container, protected from light, in a cool place.
Folic Acid Tablets

Vitamin K

In a well closed container, protected from light, in a cool place.
Vitamin K Injection

Niacinamide

In a well closed container, protected from light, in a cool place.
Niacinamide Tablets

D-Panthenol

In a well closed container, protected from light, in a cool place.
INSULIN PREPARATIONS Globuline Zinc Insulin Injection

At temperature between 2oC and 8oC, must not be allowed to freeze.
Insulin Injection

At temperature between 2oC and 8oC, must not be allowed to freeze.
Insulin Zinc Suspension

At temperature between 2oC and 8oC, must not be allowed to freeze.
Isophane Insulin Injection.

At temperature between 2oC and 8oC, must not be allowed to freeze.
1[5.
Human Insulin Injection

At temperature between 2oC and 8oC, must not be allowed to freeze.

NORMAL HUMAN PLASMA

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 626(E) , dt. 14.10.1991.
2. Subs. by G.S.R. 626(E) , dt. 14.10.1991.
Anti-Haemophillic Human Globulin

In a cool place Dried Plasma

At a temperature not exceeding 25oC Dried Normal Human Serum Albumin

At a temperature not exceeding 25oC Frozen Plasma

In deep freeze Liquid Plasma

In cold place Liquid Normal Human Serum Albumin.

In cold place.
2[7.
Whole Human Blood-

(a) Collected in ACD solution 21days At temperature between 4oC and 6oC (b) Collection in CPDA solution.
35days At temperature between 4oC and 6oC]

SERA TOXIN AND TOXOID

1. Alum Precipitated Diphtheria Toxoid 24 In cold place.
Alum Precipitated Diphtheria and

Tetanus toxoid and Pertusis vaccine combined 18 In cold place Alum Precipitated Tetanus Toxoid

In a cold place Aluminium Hydroxide

In a cold place.
Absorbed Diphtheria Toxoid Aluminium Hydroxide Absorbed

In a cold place Diphtheria Tetanus Toxoid and Pertussis Vaccine combined.
6. Aluminium Phosphate Absorbed Diphtheria Toxoid.
7. Aluminium Phosphate absorbed Diphtheria and Tetanus Toxoid
8. Aluminium phosphate absorbed diphtheria Toxoid Tetanus Toxoid and Pertussis vaccine combined.

24 In a cold place.

24 In a cold place.

18 In cold place
9. Diagnostic Diphtheira Toxin (Schick Test) 12 In cold place Cobra venom in solution 3 Between 2oC and 5oC protected from light.

at the lower limit.
oC preferable

1[

Diphtheria Toxoid

In cold place Inactivted Diagnostic Diphtheria Toxin.

In cold place Liquid serum

Between 2oC and 10

Lyophilised anti-snake venom serum

Lyophilised Schick test Toxin and control

Old Tuberculin

In cold place Thrombin (Bovine origin)

In cold place.
Tetanus Toxoid

In cold place] uberculin PPD

In cold place

OTHER VACCINES

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 26(E) , dt. 19.01.2006.
2. Subs. by G.S.R. 174(E) , dt. 16.03.2005.

Alum precipitatd pertussis Vaccine.

In cold place 2[2.
BCG Vaccine

In cold place] Cholera Vaccine

In cold place DHL Vaccine (for dog)

In cold place Measles Vaccine

In cold place Plague Vaccine

In cold place Polio Vaccine

When stored at minus 20oC

When stored at Zero oC

When stored at 4 oC Rabies vaccine

In cold place Typhoid vaccine

In cold place Typhoid and Para Typhoid Vaccine.

In cold place Typhoid Para Typhoid A and B vaccine.

In cold place

1 2 3 4

Typhoid Para Typhoid A,B & C Vaccine

In cold place Typhoid Para Typhoid A, B & C and

In cold place Tetanus Vaccine.

Typhus vaccine

In cold place Yellow Fever Vaccine

In cold place 1 [16. Anti-Rabies Vaccine (Cell Culture) 24 In cold place.]

ANTITOXIN

(For serum extracted preparations) 20% Excess potency

In cold place 30% Excess potency

In cold place 40% Excess potency

In cold place 50% Excess potency (for enzyme preparations)

In cold place 5% Excess potency

In cold place 10% Excess potency

In cold place 15% Excess potency

In cold place 20% Excess Potency

In cold place
MISCELLANEOUS DRUGS

.

Note : (1) The term ―cool place‖ means place having a temperature between 10oC and 25oC.
(2) The term ―cold place‖ means a place having a temperature not exceeding 8 oC.
(3) Capsules should be kept in a well-closed container at temperature not exceeding 30 o C.

(4) Wherever condition of storage is not specified in Column 4, it may be stored under normal room temperature.]

1. Ins. by G.S.R. 215(E) , dt. 19. 3. 1999.
2. Subs. by G.S.R. 174(E) , dt. 16. 3.2005.
2[1. Andrenaline for Injection

[As prescribed in Indian Pharmacopoeia]
2. Chorionic Gonadotrophin for

At temperature not exceeding 20oC

Injection (Lyophilised)

3. Corticotrophin

In cold place
4. Corticotrophin Lyophilised

In cold place
5. Heparin Injection

In a cool place.
6. Liquid Extract of Ergot

In cold place
7. Liver Extract Crude Injection

In a cool place
8. Oxytocin Injection

In cold place
9. Paraldehyde Injection

In cool place protected from light.
10. Pituitary Injection

In cold place.
11. Vasopressin Injection

In cold place.

1[SCHEDULE P1 [See Rule 109]
PACK SIZES OF DRUGS

Name of the Drug Dosage form Pack size

1 2 3

Albendazole Suspension 10ml Atenolol Tablets

Anti-Haemmorhoidal Topicals Rectal Capsules

Aspirin (Low-dose) Tablets

Cholecalciferol or Ergocalciferol Granules 1 gm. Sachet Ciclopiroxolamine Vaginal Cream 30 gms.
Catalin Ophthalmic drops 15 ml Famotidine Tablets

Glyceryl Trinitrate Spansules (Long Acting)

Isosorbide Dinitrate Spansules (Long Acting)

Isoniazide Syrup 200 ml Ipecacuanha Syrup 10 ml Oral Rehydration Salt (ORS) Powder Pouches to be reconstituted to one litre in one pack or in 5 unit dose sachets in one pack.
Piperazine Granules 5 gm.
Syrup 30 ml Pyrantel Pamoate Syrup 8 ml or 10 ml Potassium Chloride.
Syrup 60 ml and 200 ml.
Progestogen Qestrogen (Combinations for Oral Contraception) Tablets 21 or 22 with or without placebo.

Roxatidine Acetate Hydrochloride Tablets

Vitamin A Oral Drops Drops
7.5 ml.] 2[Co-trimoxazole Suspension 50 ml.
Haloperidol Oral Solution 15 ml.
Loxapine Oral Liquid Concentrate 15 ml.]

1. Ins. by G.S.R. 796(E) , dt. 1.10.1992 (w. e. f. 1.1.1993).

1 [SCHEDULE Q

(See rules 134 and 144) 2[PART I] 3[LIST OF DYES, COLOURS AND PIGMENTS PERMITTED TO BE USED IN COSMETICS AND SOAPS AS GIVEN UNDER IS : 4707 (PART I)-1988 (AS AMENDED BY THE BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS) Common name of the colour Colour Index Number Chemical name of the colour

1 2 3

Guinea Green B 42085 Monosodium salt of 4-(N-ethyl-p-sulfobenzylamino)– diphenylmethylone-(1-(N-ethyl-N-p-sulfoniumbenzyl)∆ 2,5cyclohexadienimine).

Light Green SF Yellowish

Disodium salt of 4-[4-(N-ethyl-p-sulfobenzylamine)-phenyl)-4sulphoniumphenyl) methylene]-2(-(N-ethyl-N-sulfobenzyl) ∆ 2,5-Cyclohexadienimine.
Tartrazine

Trisodium salt of 3-carboxy-5-hydroxy-1-p-sulfophenyl-4-psulfophenylazo-pyrazole.
Sunset yellow FCF Ponceau 3R

Disodium salt of 1-p-sulfophenylazo-2- naphthol-6-sulfonic acid.
Disodium salts of a mixture of 1-alkyl- phenylazo-2-napthol 3, 6-disulfonic acids.
Amarnath.

Trisodium salt of 1-(4-sulfo-1- napthylazo) 2-naphthol 3, 6disulfonic acid.
Erythrosine.

Disodium salt of 9-0-carboxyphenyl-6- hydroxy 2,4,5, 7tetraiodo-3- isoxanthone.
Ponceau SX.

Disodium salt of 2-(5 sulfo-2, 4-xylyl- azo)-1-naphthol-4sulfonic acid.
Brilliant Blue FCF

Disodium salt of 4-(9-4-(N-ethyl-p-sulfobenzylamino)-phenyl)- 2-sulfonium phenyl)- methylene)-(1-(N-ethyl-N-p-sulfobenzyl)- ∆ 2, 5-cyclohexadienimine).
Indigocarmine.

Disodium salt of 5,5‘-indigotindisulfonic acid.
Wool Violet 5 BN (Acid- violet 6B)

Monosodium salt of 4-(N-ethyl-p-sulfobenzylamino)-phenyl)-(4- (N-ethyl-p-(sulfonium-benzylamine)-phenyl) methylene)-(N, Ndimethyl-∆ 2,5-cyclohexadienimine) Light Green SF Yellowish 42095 Calcium salt of 4-(4-(N-ethyl-p-sulfobenzyl) (minophenyl) (4- sulfonium-phenyl)methylene), (1-(N-ethyl-N-p-sulfobenzyl)- ∆2,5-cyclohexadienimine).

1. Inserted by Notification F.-1-36/64 D, dated 17.8.1964.
2. Renumbered as Part I by G.S.R. 11(E) , dated 7.1.1991.
3. Substituted by G.S.R. 811(E) , dated 14.11.1994.

1 2 3 Alizarin Cyanine Green F

Disodium salt of 1,4-bis (O-sulfo-p-toluino) anthraquinone Quinazarine Green SS

1,4-bis-(p-Toluino)-anthraquinone Fast Green FCF

Disodium salt of 4-(4-(ethyl-p-sulfobenzylamino)-phenyl) (4hydroxy-2 sulphoniumphenyl) methylene)-(1-N-ethyl-N-psulfobenzyl) ∆ 2, 5, cyclohexadienimine).
Acid Fast Green 42100 Monosodium salt of 4-(4-N-ethyl-p-sulfobenzylomino) phenyl)- (o-chlorophenyl)-methylene)- 1-(N-ethyl-N- p-sulfoniumPyranine Concentrated

benzyl- ∆ 2,5, cyclohexadienimine).

Trisodium salt of acid.
Quinoline Yellow WS

Disodium salt of disulfonic acid of 2-(2-Quinolyl)-1, 3indandione.
Quinoline Yellow SS

2-(2-quinolyl)-1, 3 indandiene.
Poneceau 2 R

Disodium salt of 1-xylylazo-2-naphthol-3, 6-disulfonic acid.

Lithol Rubin B.

Monosodium salt of 4-(o-sulfo-p-tolylazo)3 hydroxy-2-naphthoic acid.
Lithol Rubin BCA

Calcium salt of 4-(o-sulfo-p-tolylazo)-3-hydroxy-2-naphthoic acid

Lake Red D.

Monosodium salt of 1-0-carboxyphenylazo-2-naphthol.
Lake Red DBA

Barium salt of 1-o-carboxyphenylazo-2-naphthol.
Lake Red DCA.

Calcium salt of 1-o-carboxyphenylazo-2-naphthol.
Toney Red.

I-p-phenylazophenylazo-2-naphthol.
Oil Red OS.

I-Xylylazoxylylazo-2-napththol Tetrabromofluorescein

2,4,5,7-Tetrabromo-3, 6-flurandiol.
Eosin TS

Eosin YSK. .

Disodium salt of 2,4,5,7-tetrabromo-9-0 carboxyphenyl-6hyroxy-3-isoxanthone.
Dipotassium salt of 2,4,5,7-tetrabromo-9-0 carboxyphenyl6-hyroxy-3-isoxanthone Tetrachlorofluorescein NA

2,4,5,7- tetrachloro-S, 6-Fluorandiol Tetrachlorofluorescein K.

Disodium salt of 9-0-carboxyphenyl-2,4,5,7-tetrachloro-6hydroxy-3-isoxanthone.
Tetrachloro Tetrabromo fluorescein

2,4,5,7-Tetrabromo-12,13,14,15-tetrachloro-3, 6-fluorandiol.
Phloxine B

Disodium salt of 2,4,5,7-tetrabromo-9 (3,4,5,6-tetra chloroo-carboxyphenyl)-6-hydroxy-3-isoxanthone Bluish Orange T.R.

1,4,5,8, 15-Pentabromo-2, 7-dicarboxy-3, 6-fluoran diol.

Helindone Pink CN.

5, 5-Dichloro-3, 3‘ dimethyl-thioindigo

1 2 3 Deep Maroon (Fanchon Maroon) Toluidine Red. .

Calcium salt of 4-(I-sulfo-2-naphthylazo 3- hydroxy-2naphthoic acid.
1-(o-Nitro-p-tolylazo)-2-naphthol.
Flaming Red.

I- (o-Chloro-p-nitrophenylazo)-2-naphthol Deep Red (Maroon).
Alba Red.

3-Hydroxy-N- (m-nitrophenyl)-4-(o-nitro-p-tolylazo)-2naphthamide.
o-(p,β,β-Dihydroxy-diethylamino)- phenylazo)-benzoic acid.
Orange G.
Orange II

Disodium salt of 1-phenylazo-2-naphthol-6-8-disulfonic acid.
Monosodium salt of 1-p-sulfophenylazo-2-naphthol.
Dichlorofluorescein

4,5-Dichloro-3, 6-fluorandiol.
Dichlorofluorescein. NA

Disodium salt of 9-o-carboxyphenyl-1-4,5- dichloro-6hydroxy-3-isoxanthone Diiodofluorescein.

4,5 –Diiodo-3, 6-fluorandiol Erythrosine Yellowish NA.

Disodium salt of 9-o-carboxyphenyl-6- hydroxy-4, 5diiodo-3-isoxanthone.
Erythrosine Yellowish K.

Dipotassium salt of 9-o-carboxyphenyl-6-hydroxy-4, 5diiodo-3-isoxanthone.
Erythrosine Yellowish NH

Dipotassium salt of 9-o-carboxyphenyl-6-hydroxy-4, 5diiodo-3-isoxanthone Orange TR

4,5, 15-Tribromo 2, 7-dicarboxy-3, 6- fluorandiol.
Alizarin.

1,2- Anthraquinonediol.
Dibromodiiodofluorescein.

4 ,5- Dibromo-2, 7-diiodo-3, 6-fluorandiol.
1[***]

Alphazurine FG.

Diammonium salt of 4-(N-ethyl-p- sulfobenzyl amino)- phenyl)-(2-sulfoniumphenyl)-Methytlene)-(-(1 (N-ethyl-Np-sulfobenzyl) ∆ 2 ,5-cyclohexadienimine).
Allarin Astrol B.

Monosodium salt of 1-methylamino-4-(o-sulfo-p-toluino)- anthroquinone.
Indigo.

Indigotin.
Patent Blue NA. .

Monosodium salt of 4-(4- (N-ethyl- benzyl-amino)-phenyl – (5-hydroxy-4-sulfo-2-sulfoniumphenyl-methylene)(N-ethylBenzyl- ∆ 2, 5-cyclohexadienimine).
Patent Blue CA.

Calcium salt of 4-(4- (N-ethyl- benzyl-amino)-phenyl)-(5 hydroxy-4-sulfo-2-sulfoniumphenyl, methylene)- (N-ethylN-benzyl- ∆ 2- 5-cyclohexadienimine).

Carbrantherene Blue 69825 3, 3- Dichloroindanthrene.

1. Omitted by G.S.R. 203(E), dated 18-03-2015.

1 2 3

Napthol Blue Black

Disodium salt of 8-amino-7-p- nitrophenylazo 3phenylazo-1- naphthol-3, 6-disulfonic acid

Alizurol purple SS

I-hydroxy-4-p-toluino-anthraquinone.
Acid Red 89

---- Acid Red 97

---- Acid Blue 1

---- Food Blue 3

---- Natural Orange

---- Solvent Blues 4

---- Solvent Yellow 18

---- Food Yellow 12.

---- 1[***]

---- Solvent Yellow 32.

---- Fanchon Yellow (Hansa Yellow G).

(α) -(O-Nitro-p-tolylazo) accetoacetanilide

2[Part II LIST OF COLOURS PERMITTED TO BE USED IN SOAPS.

Common name of the Colour Index Chemical name of the colour Colour No.

Phthalocyanine Blue 74160 (phthalocyninate (2--) copper.
Iragalite Red CVPB Paste or Pigment Orange 5 12075 1-(2,4-dinithro phenylazo)-2-Naphthalenol.
Citrus Red No.2. 12156 1-2(2,5-dimethoxy phenylazo) 2-naphthol.
Rhodamine B 500 45170 3-ethochloride of 9-0 carboxy-ethenyl-6-diethylamino3-ethylamine-3-isoxanthene.
Aqueous Green Paste 74260 Polychloro copper Phthalocyanine.
Pigment Yellow 3 11710 2-(4-Chloro-2-nitrophenyl)-azo-N-(-2-Chlorophenyl)-3- Oxobutamide.
Irgalite Carmine F-P Powder or Pigments Red 5.

Monolite Red 4R HV Paste or Pigment Red 7.
12490 N-(5-Chloro-2, 4-dimethoxy-phenyl)-4-(CSdiathylamine) Sulfonyl-2-methoxyphenyl)azo3-hydroxy-2-naphthalene carboxamide.
12420 N-(4-Chloro-2-methylphenyl-4-(-4-Chloro-2-methylphenyl) Azo 3-hydroxy-2-naphthalenol Carboxamide.
Oil Red No.1 or Solvent Red 24 or Oil Red 3R.
26105 4-0-Tolylazo-Toluidine azo 2-naphthalenol.]

*This list of colour for use in soaps is in addition to those colours already given in Schedule Q and are used for soaps.]

1. Omitted by G.S.R. 203(E) dated 18-03-2015

1[SCHEDULE R

[See Rule 125]

STANDARDS FOR CONDOMS MADE OF RUBBER LATEX INTENDED FOR SINGLE USE
AND OTHER MECHANICAL CONTRACEPTIVES

I-Condoms

1. Description - Condoms consist of cylindrical rubber sheaths with one end open. The open end shall terminate with an integral rim. The closed end may have a receptacle. They may be supplied rolled and shall be free from tackiness and shall be capable of being unrolled readily.

2. Materials - (1) Condoms shall be manufactured from good quality rubber latex and shall be free from embedded grit and shall be opaque or translucent prior to the application of dusting materials or lubricants.

(2) The rubber latex, colours used and any dusting materials or lubricants applied to the condoms shall neither contain nor liberate substances which are known to have toxic or other harmful effects under normal conditions of use. Any dusting material or lubricant or colour used shall not have deleterious effect on the condoms or be harmful to the users.

3. Procedure for sampling during production − (1) Specimens constituting the test samples shall be taken at random successively from each quantum of production that is, from the quantity produced from the same finished rubber latex and under the same processing and finishing conditions of manufacture and samples from each quantum shall be tested separately to ascertain conformity of quantum with the specified requirements in accordance with the tests described in this Schedule.

(2) (a) The number of samples drawn from each quantum shall be not less than 0.5 per cent of the number.

(b) The number of samples drawn from each quantum shall be tested for Burst Volume and Pressure Test and Water Leakage Test in accordance with the method prescribed in paras 9 and 10 of this Schedule. 75 per cent of the samples drawn will be tested for Water Leakage Test and 25 per cent will be tested for Burst Volume and Pressure Test.

(c) The number of test samples ̳N‘ and the number of rejected samples ̳R‘ from a sequence of production quanta shall be recorded in a register. The cumulative total of test samples ̳N‘ and the cumulative total of rejects ̳R‘ from the test shall be recorded and the condoms shall be deemed to comply with the requirements if the cumulative total of rejects ̳R‘ is not more than 2[0.0025N+3 x √0.0025N] for Water Leakage Test, and 2[0.015N+3 x √0.015N] for Burst Volume and Pressure Test.

(3) Each unit of 100 test samples shall be distributed for the various tests as follows: - 25 for Burst Volume Pressure Test, and;
75 for Water Leakage Test.

1 Subs. by G.S.R. 495(E) , dt. 9.6.1995.

(4) Where the number of test samples is a multiple of 100 the distribution scale mentioned above shall be prorated.

(5) If the cumulative total sample rejected exceeds the number of allowables at any point in the sequence of quanta, the quantum at which this occurs shall be liable to rejection.
The assessment of quality of further production quanta shall include all previous test results starting from quantum number 1 and approval of production shall be in suspense until the condition required by the scheme is again fulfilled.

(6) At least one sample shall be taken at random from each production quantum not exceeding 10,000 condoms and shall satisfy all requirements regarding dimensions as specified in paragraph 8 of this Schedule.

4. Procedure for sampling and testing of finished products by a manufacturer – A. Water Leakage Test.- (1) Statistical sampling for quality control assessment of the finished product in respect of Water Leakage Test shall be done in accordance with the plan set out in Annexure 1 to this Schedule.

(2) A test sample failing in the above test is to be considered as defective. If the cumulative total of rejects ̳R‘ is found to be equal to or greater than the number shown against ̳R‘ in Annexure-I, the batch or lot shall be declared as not of standard quality.

B. Bursting Volume and Pressure Test.- (1) Sample condoms shall be tested for Bursting Volume and Pressure Test. Statistical sampling for this test shall be done in accordance with the plan set out in Annexure III to this Schedule.
Condoms shall not leak or burst at a volume of less than that specified or at a pressure less than 1.0 kpa (gauge), when tested as per paragraph 9, both before and after oven conditioning as specified in Annexure V. Bursting Volume minimum limit in litres shall be equal to [mean condom width (mm)2] rounded to the nearest 0.5 litre.
151.8

(2) A test sample failing in the above test is to be considered defective. If the cumulative total of rejects ̳R‘ is found to be equal or greater than the number shown against ̳R‘ in Annexure III, the batch or lot shall be declared as not of standard quality.

C. Dimensions. - At least 2 samples drawn from the lot or batch shall satisfy the requirements regarding dimensions as specified in paragraph 8 of this Schedule.

5. Procedure for sampling and testing of condoms by a purchaser -

A. Water Leakage Test- (1) Statistical sampling of condoms by a purchaser for Water Leakage Test shall be done in accordance with the plan set out in Annexure II to this Schedule;

(2) A test sample failing in the above test is to be considered as defective. If the cumulative total of rejects ̳R‘ is found to be equal to or greater than the number shown against ̳R‘ in the Annexure-II, the batch or lot shall be declared as not of standard quality.

B. Bursting Volume and Pressure Test - Sample condoms shall be tested for Bursting Volume and Pressure Test. Statistical sampling for this test shall be done in accordance with the plan set out in Annexure III to this Schedule. If the cumulative total of rejects ̳R‘ is found

to be equal to or greater that the number shown against ̳R‘ in Annexure III, the batch or lot shall be declared as not of standard quality.

Condom shall not leak or burst at a volume of less than that specified or at a pressure less than 1.0 kpa (gauge), when tested as specified in paragraph 9, both before and after oven conditioning as per specified in Annexure V. Bursting volume minimum limit in litres shall be equal to [mean condom width (mm)2] rounded to the nearest 0.5 litre.
151.8

C. Dimensions. - At least two samples from the lot or batch shall satisfy the requirements regarding dimensions as specified in paragraph 8 of this Schedule.

6. Sampling plan for a Drugs Inspector - (1) Where an Inspector under the Act desires to take test samples from the premises of manufacturer or a distribution depot; twenty containers from each batch of production may be selected by him on a random basis and from each of the containers, five samples shall be taken. The hundred samples so selected shall be distributed for various tests as specified in paragraph 7 of this Schedule. In case the number of container is less than twenty, the number of samples to be taken from each container shall be proportionately increased.
(2) Where an Inspector under the Act desires to take samples from a sales premises, he shall take hundred samples from each batch of production in accordance with the procedure as specified in sub- paragraph (1).

7. Sampled condoms drawn under sub-paragraph.- (1) shall be distributed for various tests as follows: - Two samples for thickness, length and width;
Forty-five samples for Water Leakage Test;
Forty-five samples for Bursting Volume and Pressure Test; and Eight samples as reserve.

The samples shall be declared as not of standard quality, if, - (i) the number of condoms found defective in the Water Leakage Test exceeds one; (ii) the number of condoms found defective in Bursting Volume and Pressure Test exceeds two; (iii) samples fail to conform to the requirements of dimensions as specified in paragraph 8 of this Schedule.

8. Dimensions - (1) The length when unrolled (excluding test) shall be not less than - (i) 170 mm.
(ii) 180 mm.
(2) The width of a condom which laid flat and measured at any point within 85 mm from the open end shall be,–

(i) 49 ± 2 mm for 170 mm length.

(ii) 53 ± 2 mm for 180 mm length.

(3) The single-wall thickness of a condom when measured at three points, one at 30 ± 2mm from the open end, 30 ± 5mm from the close end excluding the reservoir tip and at the mid distance between these two point shall be from 0.045 mm to 0.075 mm.

NOTE 1. - The single-wall thickness shall be determined with a suitable micrometer dial gauge graduated in intervals of 0.01 mm.

NOTE 2. - Condoms shall, prior to the measurement of thickness, have the dusting powder or the lubricant or both removed by means of water or Isopropanol.

9. Bursting Volume and Pressure Test - Determination of Bursting Volume and Pressure Test shall be done as specified in Annexure IV.

10. Water Leakage Test - Unroll the condom and fit the open end on a suitable mount, the condom thus being suspended open end upwards. Fill it with 300 ml water at room temperature and inspect it after a period of at least 1 minute for leakage up to 25.mm from the open end. If, because of distension of the condom the water does not extend to 25 mm from the open end, raise the closed end until the water level reaches this distance. After at least 1 minute, inspect the newly-wetted part of the condom for leakage. The condom shall be deemed to be defective if it bursts during test or shows any evidence of leakage or seepage of microdroplets or does not hold 300 ml water.
11. Quantity of Lubricant - (1) The condoms shall be dressed with silicone lubricant.
The quantity required on each individual condom should not be less than 200 mg and minimum viscosity shall be 200 centistokes.

(2) Lubricated condoms in individual foil packages shall be weighed on an Analytical Balance. Each condom shall be removed from its foil package and both condom and its foil package shall be washed in denatured ethanol or isopropanol, dried and then weighed again.
All weights shall be recorded to the nearest milligram (mg.). Compliance with the requirement shall be determined by subtracting the weight of the washed and dried condom and its foil package from the weight of sample condom in individual foil package prior to the removal of lubricant. Washing and drying may be required upto a total of four times if the lubricant quantity is less than the required minimum.

(3) At least thirteen samples shall be drawn from the lot or batch and the samples shall satisfy the requirements regarding the quantity of lubricant.

12. Colour Fastness - Not less than ten samples taken at random from each batch of coloured condoms shall pass the following test for colour fastness, namely :- Thoroughly wet inside and outside of the condom with distilled water. Make no attempt to remove any dusting material or lubricant. Wrap the wet condom in white absorbent paper so that the largest possible surface area of the condom is in contact with the paper and seal the whole in a suitable container to prevent loss of moisture. Allow the container and its contents to stand for 16 hours to 24 hours at room temperature. After removing the absorbent paper from the container, examine it visually in the natural daylight for any indication of staining. No part of the absorbent paper shall be stained. If there is any indication of staining of the absorbent paper by any colouring agent present in any of the condoms or any dusting material or lubricant, the entire batch shall be declared to be not of standard quality.
13. Labelling, packing and storage - (1) The condoms shall be individually wrapped and sealed in laminates containing at least eight microns of aluminium foil. The individual condom shall be packed in square (non-squeeze condition) / rectangular aluminium foil. The packing shall protect the condoms from contamination and mechanical damage. The smallest packing offered to the consumer shall bear a clear permanent marking with the following particulars, namely: -

(i) Manufacturer‘s name and address and the trade name of the condoms, if any;
(ii) Batch number;
(iii) Date of manufacture (Month and year only);
(iv) Date of expiry (Month and year only) which shall not be more than thirty-six months from the date of manufacture;

(v) The words ―For single use only‖ (2) The condoms shall be stored in a cool dry place away from heat and direct sunlight.

14. Integrity of individual package seals - Sample condoms in individual packages shall be placed in a sealed, transparent container (such as a laboratory Bell jar) and subjected to vacuum of 50± 10 kpa (gauge) for a period of one minute.
Condom packages that do not inflate or remain inflated for the period of the test shall be deemed non- compliers. In doubtful cases, the test may be repeated, and both the inflation and deflation of packages may be observed on application and removal of vacuum. An AQL of 2.5 per cent will be applied in assessing the results of this test. Thirty-two samples of condoms for a batch size less than 5 lakhs and fifty samples of condoms for batch size more than 5 lakhs shall be tested for integrity test of individual package seals and compliance limit or acceptance number shall be not more than two or three condoms respectively.

II- Other Mechanical Contraceptive

15. Standards for other mechanical contraceptive - Standards for ̳Copper T‘ and ̳Tubal Ring‘shall be as laid down in Annexure VI.

[ANNEXURE I

[See Paragraph 4-A]

SAMPLING PLAN FOR QUALITY CONTROL OF CONDOMS AT MANUFACTURER’S LEVEL.

BATCH SIZE: 35,001 TO 1.5 LAKH Single Sampling Plan Sample Size 200: AQL - 0.25 AC - 1 R - 2

1. Subs. by. G.S.R. 353(E) , for ― Annexures I to III‖ dt. 26-4-2000.

Single Sampling Plan BATCH SIZE: 150001 TO 5 LAKHS Sample Size 315 : AQL - 0.25 AC - 2 R - 3

BATCH SIZE: OVER 5 LAKHS Single Sampling Plan.
Sample Size 500: AQL - 0.25 AC - 3 R - 4

Note : AQL denotes Acceptance Quality Level;
AC denotes Acceptance Number i.e. the maximum allowable number of defectives for acceptance of the Batch; and R denotes Rejection Number i.e., the minimum number of defectives for rejection of the Batch.

ANNEDURE II

[See Paragraph 5A]

SAMPLING PLAN FOR QUALITY CONTROL OF CONDOMS AT PURCHASER‘S LEVEL.

BATCH SIZE: 35,001 TO 1.5 LAKHS Single Sampling Plan Sample Size 200:
AQL
- 0.25 AC
- 1 R - 2

BATCH SIZE : 15,001 TO 5 LAKHS Single Sampling Plan.
Sample Size 315:
AQL
- 0.25 AC
- 2 R - 3

BATCH SIZE : OVER 5 LAKHS Single Sampling Plan Sample Size 500:
AQL
- 0.25 AC
- 3 R - 4

Note: AQL denotes Acceptance Quality Level;
AC denotes Acceptance Number i.e. the maximum allowable number of defectives for acceptance of the Batch; and R denotes Rejection Number i.e., the minimum number of defectives for rejection of the Batch.

ANNEXURE III

[See Paragraph 4-B and 5-B]

SAMPLING PLAN FOR BURSTING VOLUME AND PRESSURE TEST.

Single Sampling Plan.
BATCH SIZE: 35,001 TO 1.5 LAKH.
Sample Size 200: AQL - 1.5 AC - 7 R - 8 BATCH SIZE: 150001 LAKHS TO 5 LAKHS Single Sampling Plan.
Sample Size 315: AQL - 1.5 AC - 10 R - 11

Single Sampling Plan.
BATCH SIZE: OVER 5 LAKHS Sample Size 500: AQL - 1.5 AC - 14 R - 15

Note : AQL denotes Acceptance Quality Level;
AC denotes Acceptance Number i.e. the maximum allowable number of defectives for acceptance of the Batch; and R denotes Rejection Number i.e., the minimum number of defectives for rejection of the Batch.]

ANNEXURE IV

(See Paragraph 9)
DETERMINATION OF BURSTING VOLUME AND PRESSURE

1. Principle - Inflation of constant length of the condom with air and recording the volume and pressure at the moment of bursting.
2. Apparatus - (1) Apparatus suitable for inflating the condom with clean air at a specified rate and provided with equipment for measuring volume and pressure.
(2) Suitable mount for fitting the condoms to the apparatus as shown in the figure annexed.
(3) Rod, 140 mm in length having a smooth sphere 20 mm in diameter at its top (see the figure) for hanging the unrolled condom when fixed to the apparatus.
3. Procedure - (1) Unroll the condom, hang it on the rod (2.3), affix to the mount (2.2) and inflate with air at a rate of 0.4 to 0.5 litre/sec. (24 to 30 litres/min.) (2) Measure and note the bursting volume, in litres rounded to the nearest 0.5 litre and the bursting pressure, in kilopascals rounded to the nearest 0.1 kpa.
4. Test report - The test report shall include the following particulars:
(a) the identification of the sample;
(b) the bursting volume and bursting pressure of each tested condom;
(c) the date of testing.

ANNEXURE V

[See Paragraphs 4(B) and 5 (B)

OVEN CONDITIONING

1. Principle of the Method - The test consists in subjecting test samples to controlled deterioration by air at an elevated temperature and at atmospheric pressure after which burst volume and pressure limits are measured.
2. Apparatus - The air oven shall be of such a size that the total volume of the test samples does not exceed 10 per cent of the free air space of the oven. Provision shall be made for slow circulation of air in the oven of not less than three changes and not more than ten changes per hour. The temperature of the oven shall be thermostatically controlled so that the test samples are kept within ± 2o C of the specified ageing temperature. A thermometer shall be placed near the centre of the ageing test samples to record the actual ageing temperature.
Note: - Copper or copper alloys shall not be used for the material of construction of the oven prescribed.
3. Test sample - The foil laminations of individual packages should remain intact throughout all laboratory handling including over conditioning.
4. Temperature of the oven – Maintain the oven at 70 ± 2o C.
5. Duration of test - 96 hours.
6. Procedure - Condition the requisite number of unopened packages of rubber condoms in the oven at 70 ± 2o C for 96 hours. After heating, keep the packages at 23 ± 5o C for at least 12 hours but not more than 96 hours. Open the packages and examine conditioned condoms for tackiness, brittleness, or other signs of deterioration. Within 96 hours but not sooner than 12 hours after conditioning, do the bursting volume and pressure Test as described in this Schedule.

ANNEXURE VI (See Paragraph 15)

1. Standards for Copper T (200B) (IS-12418) (part 4)-1991-UDC 615.477.87) - Contraceptive Device Copper T (200 B) shall conform to the Indian Standards laid down from time to time by the Bureau of Indian Standards.

2. Standards for Contraceptive Tubal Ring (IS 13009 : 1990-UDC 615.472.6 :
611.656) - Contraceptive Device Tubal Ring shall conform to the Indian Standards laid down from time to time by the Bureau of Indian Standards.]

1[SCHEDULE R1 (See Rules 109A, 109, 109C and 125A)

The medical devices shall conform to the Indian Standards laid down from time to time by the Bureau of Indian Standards. If there are no Bureau of Indian Standards then it shall conform to the International Standards, like International Organisation for Standardisation, or other International Pharmacopeia Standards and such other standards as may be specified for this purpose. In case national or international standards are not available, the device shall conform to the manufacturer‘s validated standards.]

2[SCHEDULE S [See Rule 150-A]

STANDARDS FOR COSMETICS Standards for cosmetics in finished form − The following cosmetics in finished form shall conform to the Indian Standards specifications laid down from time to time by the

[Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS)].
1. Skin Powders.
2. Skin Powder for infants.
3. Tooth Powder.
4. Toothpaste.
5. Skin Creams.
6. Hair Oils.
7. Shampoo, Soap-based.
8. Shampoo, Synthetic-Detergent based.
9. Hair Creams.
10. Oxidation hair dyes, Liquid.
11. Cologne.]

[12. Nail Polish (Nail Enamel).
13. After Shave Lotion.
14. Pomades and Brilliantines.
15. Depliatories Chemical.
16 Shaving Creams.
17. Cosmetic Pencils.
18. Lipstick.]

[19. Toilet Soap.
20. Liquid Toilet Soap.
21. Baby Toilet Soap.
22. Shaving Soap.
23. Transparent Toilet Soap.]

4. Ins. By G.S.R. 731(E) dated 23-08-1990
5. Ins. By G.S.R. 673(E) dated 27-10-1993

1[24. Lipsalve IS:10284.
25. Powder Hair Dye IS: 10350.
26. Bindi (Liquid) IS: 10998.
27. Kum Kum Powder IS: 10999.
28. Henna Powder IS: 11142.] 2[29.
Bathing Bars IS: 13498: 1997 3[30.
Sindoor IS: 14649: 1999 4[31.
Liquid Foundation makeup IS 14318 4[32.
Cold Wax Hair remover IS 15152 4[33.
Face pack IS 15153 4[34.
Kajal IS 15154 4[35.
Oxidation Hair Dyes (Emulson Type) IS 15205 4[36.
Cream Bleach IS 15608

2. Ins. by G.S.R. 592(E), dt.13.8.2008.
4. Ins. by G.S.R. 203(E), dt.18.03.2015.

5[SCHEDULE T

(See rule 157)

GOOD MANUFACTURING PRACTICES FOR AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA AND UNANI
MEDICINES

The Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) are prescribed as follows in Part I and Part II to ensure that:

(i) Raw materials used in the manufacture of drugs are authentic, of prescribed quality and are free from contamination.
(ii) The manufacturing process is as has been prescribed to maintain the standards.
(iii) Adequate quality control measures are adopted.
(iv) The manufactured drug which is released for sale is of acceptable quality.
(v) To achieve the objectives listed above, each licensee shall evolve methodology and procedures for following the prescribed process of manufacture of drugs which should be documented as a manual and kept for reference and inspection. However, under IMCC Act 1970 registered Vaidyas, Siddhas and Hakeems who prepare medicines on their own to dispense to their patients and not selling such drugs in the market are exempted from the purview of G.M.P.

PART I
GOOD MANUFACTURING PRACTICES

1.1 Factory Premises:
The manufacturing plant should have adequate space for: - (i)Receiving and storing raw material.
(ii)Manufacturing process areas.
(iii)Quality control section.
(iv)Finished goods store.
(v)Office.
(vi)Rejected goods/drugs store.
1.1 General Requirements:
1.1(A) Location and surroundings - The factory building for manufacture of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani medicines shall be so situated and shall have such construction as to avoid contamination from open sewerage, drain, public lavatory for any factory which produces disagreeable or obnoxious odour or fumes or excessive soot, dust and smoke.
1.1(B) Buildings - The buildings used for factory shall be such as to permit production of drugs under hygienic conditions and should be free from cobwebs and insects/rodents. It should have adequate provision of light and ventilation. The floor and the walls should not be damp or moist. The premises used for manufacturing, processing, packaging and labelling will be in conformity with the provisions of the Factory Act. It shall be located so as to be:
(I) Compatible with other manufacturing operations that may be carried out in the same or adjacent premises.
(II) Adequately provided with working space to allow orderly and logical placement of equipment and materials to avoid the risk of mix-up between different drugs or components thereof and control the possibility of cross contamination by other drugs or substances and avoid the risk of omission of any manufacturing or control step.
(III) Designed, constructed and maintained to prevent entry of insects and rodents.

Interior surface (walls, floors and ceilings) shall be smooth and free from cracks and permit easy cleaning and disinfection. The walls of the room in which the manufacturing operations are carried out shall be impervious to and be capable of being kept clean. The flooring shall be smooth and even and shall be such as not to permit retention or accumulation of dust or waste products.
(IV) Provided with proper drainage system in the processing area. The sanitary fittings and electrical fixtures in the manufacturing area shall be proper and safe.
(V) Furnace/Bhatti section could be covered with tin roof and proper ventilation, but sufficient care should be taken to prevent flies and dust.

(VI) There should be fire safety measures and proper exits should be there.
(VII) Drying Space: -There should be separate space for drying of raw material, in process medicine or medicines which require drying before packing. This space will be protected from flies/ insects/dust etc., by proper flooring, wiremash window, glass panels or other material.
1.1(C) Water Supply - The water used in manufacture shall be pure and of potable quality. Adequate provision of water for washing the premises shall be made.
1.1(D) Disposable of Waste - From the manufacturing section and laboratories the waste water and the residues which might be prejudicial to the workers or public health shall be disposed off.
1.1(E) Container‘s Cleaning - In factories where operations involving the use of containers such as glass bottles, vials and jars are conducted, there shall be adequate arrangements separated from the manufacturing operations for washing, cleaning and drying of such containers.
1.1(F) Stores - Storage should have proper ventilation and shall be free from dampness. It should provide independent adequate space for storage of different types of material, such as raw material, packaging material and finished products.
1.1. (F)(A) Raw Materials - All raw materials procured for manufacturing will be stored in the raw materials store. The manufacture based on the experience and the characteristics of the particular raw material used in Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani system shall decide the use of appropriate containers which would protect the quality of raw materials as well as prevent it from damage due to dampness, microbiological contamination or rodent and insect infestation, etc. If certain raw materials require such controlled environmental conditions, the raw materials stores may be sub-divided with proper enclosures to provide such conditions by suitable cabinization. While designing such containers, cupboard or areas in the raw materials store, care may be taken to handle the following different categories of raw materials:-

1. Raw material of metallic origin.
2. Raw material of mineral origin.
3. Raw material from animal source.
4. Fresh herbs.
5. Dry herbs or plant parts
6. Excipients etc.

7. Volatile oils/perfumes and flavours

8. Plant concentrates/ extracts and exudates/resins.

Each container used for raw material storage shall be properly identified with the label which indicates name of the raw material, source of supply and will also clearly state the status of raw material such as ̳UNDER TEST‘ or ̳APPROVED‘ or ̳REJECTED‘.
The labels shall further indicate the identity of the particular supply in the form of Batch No. or Lot No. and the date of receipt of the consignment.

All the raw materials shall be sampled and got tested either by the in-house Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani experts (Quality control technical person) or by the laboratories approved by the Government and shall be used only on approval after verifying. The rejected raw material should be removed from other raw material store and should be kept in separate room. Procedure of ̳First in first out‘ should be adopted for raw materials wherever necessary. Records of the receipt, testing and approval or rejection and use of raw material shall be maintained.

1.1. (F)(B) Packaging Materials. - All packaging materials such as bottles, jars, capsules etc. shall be stored properly. All containers and closure shall be adequately cleaned and dried before packing the products.

1.1. (F)(C) Finished Goods Stores. - The finished goods transferred from the production area after proper packaging shall be stored in the finished goods stores within an area marked ―Quarantine‖. After the quality control laboratory and the experts have checked the correctness of finished goods with reference to its packing/labelling as well as the finished product quality as prescribed, then it will be moved to ―Approved Finished Goods Stock‖ area. Only approved finished goods shall be dispatched as per marketing requirements. Distribution records shall be maintained as required.
If any Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drug needs special storage conditions, finished goods store shall provide necessary environmental requirements.

1.1(G) Working space. - The manufacturing area shall provide adequate space (manufacture and quality control) for orderly placement of equipment and material used in any of the operations for which these employed so as to facilitate easy and safe working and to minimize or to eliminate any risk of mix-up between different drugs, raw materials and to prevent the possibility of cross contamination of one drug by another drug that is manufactured, stored or handled in the same premises.

1.1(H) Health Clothing, Sanitation and Hygiene of Workers.- All workers employed in the Factory shall be free from contagious diseases. The clothing of the workers shall consist of proper uniform suitable to the nature of work and the climate and shall be clean. The uniform shall also include cloth or synthetic covering for hands, feet and head wherever required. Adequate facilities for personal cleanliness such as clean towels, soap and scrubbing brushes shall be provided. Separate provision shall be made for lavatories to be used by men and women, and such lavatories shall be located at places separated from the processing rooms. Workers will also be provided facilities for changing their clothes and to keep their personal belongings.

1.1. (I) Medical Services: The manufacturer shall also provide:- (a) adequate facilities for first aid;
(b) medical examination of workers at the time of employment and periodical check up thereafter by a physician once a year, with particular attention being devoted to freedom from infections. Records thereof shall be maintained.
1.1(J) Machinery and Equipments - For carrying out manufacturing depending on the size of operation and the nature of product manufactured, suitable equipment either manually operated or operated semi-automatically (Electrical or steam based) or fully automatic machinery shall be made available. These may include machines for use in the process of manufacture such as crushing, grinding, powdering, boiling, mashing, burning, roasting, filtering, drying, filling, labelling and packing etc. to ensure ease in movement of workers and orderliness in operations a suitably adequate space will be ensured between two machines or rows of machines. These equipments have to be properly installed and maintained with proper cleaning. List of equipments and machinery recommended is indicated in Part II-A.
Proper Standard Operational Procedures (SOPs) for cleaning, maintaining and performance of every machine should be laid down.

1.1(K) Batch Manufacturing Records - The licensee shall maintain batch manufacturing record of each batch of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs manufactured irrespective of the type of product manufactured (classical preparation or patent and proprietary medicines). Manufacturing records are required to provide an account of the list of raw materials and their quantities obtained from the store, tests conducted during the various stages of manufacture like taste, colour, physical characteristics and chemical tests as may be necessary or indicated in the approved books of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani mentioned in the First Schedule of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of
1940). These tests may include any in-house or pharmacopoeial test adopted by the manufacturer in the raw material or in the process material and in the finished product.
These records shall be duly signed by Production and Quality Control Personnel respectively. Details of transfer of manufactured drug to the finished products store including dates and quantity of drugs transferred along with record of testing of the finished product, if any, and packaging, records shall be maintained. Only after the manufactured drugs have been verified and accepted quality shall be allowed to be cleared for sale.
It should be essential to maintain the record of date, manpower, machine and equipments used and to keep in process record of various shodhana, bhavana, burning and fire and specific grindings in terms of internal use.

1.1(L) Distribution Records - Records of sale and distribution of each batch of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Drugs shall be maintained in order to facilitate prompt and complete recall of the batch, if necessary.The duration of record keeping should be the date of expiry of the batch. Certain category of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani medicines like Bhasma, Rasa, Kupi-pakva, Parpati, Sindura, Karpu/Uppu/Puram, Kushta, Asavaarishta etc. do not have expiry date in contrast their efficacy increases with the passage of time. Hence, records need be maintained upto five years of the exhausting of stock.

1.1(M) Record of Market Complaints - Manufacturers shall maintain a register to record all reports of market complaints received regarding the products sold in the market.
The manufacturer shall enter all data received on such market complaints, investigations carried out by the manufacturers regarding the complaint as well as any corrective action initiated to prevent recurrence of such market complaints shall also be recorded. Once in a period of six months the manufacturer shall submit the record of such complaints to the licensing authority. The Register shall also be available for inspection during any inspection of the premises.
Reports of any adverse reaction resulting from the use of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs shall also be maintained in a separate register by each manufacturer. The manufacturer shall investigate any of the adverse reaction to find if the same is due to any defect in the product, and whether such reactions are already reported in the literature or it is a new observation.

1.1(N) Quality Control. - Every licensee is required to provide facility for quality control section in his own premises or through Government approved testing laboratory. The test shall be as per the Auurveda, Siddha and Unani pharmacopoeial standard. Where the tests are not available, the test should be performed according to the manufacturers‘ specification or other information available. The quality control section shall verify all the raw materials, monitor in-process quality checks and control the quality of finished product being released to finished goods store/warehouse. Preferably for such quality control there will be a separate expert. The quality control section shall have the following facilities:–

(1) There should be 150 sq. feet area for quality control section.
(2) For identification of raw drugs, reference books and reference samples should be maintained.
(3) Manufacturing record should be maintained for the various processes.
(4) To verify the finished products, controlled samples of finished products of each batch will be kept till the expiry date of product for 3 years.
(5) To supervise and monitor adequacy of conditions under which raw materials, semi- finished products and finished products are stored.
(6) Keep record in establishing shelf life and storage requirements for the drugs.

(7) Manufacturers who are manufacturing patent and proprietary Ayurveda, Siddha, and Unani medicines shall provide their own specification and control references in respect of such formulated drugs.
(8) The record of specific method and procedure of preparation, that is, ―Bhavana‖, ―Mardana‖ and ―Puta‖ and the record of every process carried out by the manufacturer shall be maintained.
(9) The standards for identity, purity and strength as given in respective pharmacopoeias of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani systems of medicines published by Government of India shall be complied with.
(10) All raw materials will be monitored for fungal, bacterial contamination with a view to minimize such contamination.
(11) Quality control section will have a minimum of: – 1[(i) (a) Expert in Ayurveda or Sidha or Unani medicine who possesses a degree qualification recognized under Schedule II of Indian Medicine Central Council Act 1970;
(b) Chemist, who shall possess at least Bachelor Degree in Science or Pharmacy or Pharmacy (Ayurveda), awarded by a recognized University; and (c) Botanist (Pharmacognosist), who shall possess at least Bachelor Degree in Science (Medical) or Pharmacy or Pharmacy (Ayurveda) awarded by a recognized University.] (ii) The manufacturing unit shall have a quality control section as explained under Section 35 (ii). Alternatively, these quality control provisions will be met by getting testing etc., from a recognised laboratory for Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs; under Rule 160-A of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act. The manufacturing company will maintain all the record of various tests got done from outside recognised laboratory.
(iii) List of equipments recommended is indicated in Part II C.

1.2. Requirement for Sterile Product:
(A) Manufacturing Areas: – For the manufacture of sterile Ayurvedic, Unani and Siddha drugs, separate enclosed areas specifically designed for the purpose shall be provided. These areas shall be provided with air locks for entry and shall be essentially dust free and ventilated with an air supply. For all areas where aseptic manufacture has to be carried out, air supply shall be filtered through bacteria retaining filters (HEPA Filters) and shall be at a pressure higher than in the adjacent areas. The filters shall be checked for performance on installation and periodically thereafter the record of checks shall be maintained. All the surfaces in sterile manufacturing areas shall be designed to facilitate cleaning and disinfection. For sterile manufacturing routine microbial counts of all Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drug manufacturing areas shall be carried out during operations. Results of such count shall be checked against established in-house standards and record maintained.

Access to manufacturing areas shall be restricted to minimum number of authorized personnel. Special procedure to be followed for entering and leaving the manufacturing areas shall be written down and displayed.
For the manufacturing of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drug that can be sterilized in their final containers, the design of the areas shall preclude the possibility of the products intended for sterilization being mixed with or taken to be products already sterilized. In case of terminally sterilized products, the design of the areas shall preclude the possibility of mix-up between non-sterile products.

(B) Precautions against contamination and mix:

(a) Carrying out manufacturing operations in a separate block of adequately isolated building or operating in an isolated enclosure within the building,

(b) Using appropriate pressure differential in the process area.

(c) Providing a suitable exhaust system.
(d) Designing laminar flow sterile air system for sterile products.
(e) The germicidal efficiency of UV lamps shall be checked and recorded indicating the burning hours or checked using intensity.

(f) Individual containers of liquids and ophthalmic solutions shall be examined against black-white background fitted with diffused light after filling to ensure freedom from contamination with foreign suspended matter.

(g) Expert technical staff approved by the Licensing Authority shall check and compare actual yield against theoretical yield before final distribution of the batch.
All process controls as required under master formula including room temperature, relative humidity, volume filled, leakage and clarity shall be checked and recorded.

PART II

A. LIST OF RECOMMENDED MACHINERY, EQUIPMENT AND MINIMUM MANUFACTURING PREMISES REQUIRED FOR THE MANUFACTURE OF VARIOUS CATEGORIES OF AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA SYSTEM OF MEDICINES

One machine indicated for one category of medicine could be used for the manufacturing of other category of medicine also. Similarly some of the manufacturing areas like powdering, furnace, packing of liquids and Avaleha, Paks, could also be shared for these items.

Sl.No. Category of Medicine Minimum manufacturing space required Machinery/equipment recommended

(1) (2) (3) (4)

1200 Square feet covered area with separate cabins or partitions for each activity.
If Unani medicines are manufactured in same premises an additional area of 400 sq. feet will be required.

1. Anjana/Pisti 100 sq. feet. Karel/mechanized/motorized, karel.
End runner/Ball-Mill Sieves/Shifter.
Churna / Nasya/ Manjan/Lepa/ Kwath Churn 200 sq feet Grinder/disintegrator/Pulveriser/ Powder mixer/sieves/shifter.
3. Pills/Vati /Gutika Matirai and tablets 100 sq. feet Ball Mill, Mass mixer/powder mixer, Granulator, drier, tablet compressing machine, pill/vati cutting machine, stainless steel trays/container for storage and sugar coating, polishing pan in case of sugar-coated tablets,mechanised chattoo (for mixing guggulu) where required.
Kupi pakava/Ksara/ Parpati/LavanaBhasm a Satva/Sindura Karpu/ Uppu / Param 150 sq. feet Bhatti, Karahi/Stainless steel Vessels/Patila Flask, Multani Matti/Plaster of Paris, Copper Rod, Earthern container, Gaj Put Bhatti, Mufflefurnace(Electrically operated) End/EdgeRunner, Exhaust Fan, Wooden/S.S.Spatula.

Kajal 100 sq. feet Earthern lamps for collection of Kajal, Triple Roller Mill, End Runner, Sieves, S.S.Patila, Filling/ packing and manufacturing room should be provided with exhaust fan and ultra violet lamps.
Capsules 100 sq. feet Air Conditioner, De-humidifier, hygrometer, thermometer, Capsule filling machine and chemical balance.
7. Ointment/Marham Pasai 100sq. feet Tube filling machine, Crimping Machine/Ointment Mixer, End Runner/ Mill (Where required) S.S.
Storage Container S.S.Patila.

Sl.No. Category of Medicine Minimum manufacturing space required Machinery/equipment recommended

(1) (2) (3) (4)

8. Pak/Avaleh/Khand/ Modak/Lakayam 100 sq. feet Bhatti section fitted with exhaust fan and should be fly proof, Iron Kadahi/S.S. Patila and S.S. Storage container.
Panak, Syrup / Pravahi Kwath Manapaku 150 sq, feet Tincture press, exhaust fan fitted and fly proof, Bhatti section, Bottle washing machine, filter press / Gravity filter, liquid filling machine P.P. Capping Machine

Asava / Arishta 200 sq. ft Same as mentioned above.
Fermentation tanks, containers and distillation plant where necessary, Filter Press.
Sura Ark Tinir 100 sq. ft 100 sq. ft Same as mentioned above plus Distillation plant and Transfer pump.
Maceration tank, Distillation plant, Liquid filling tank with tap / Gravity

filter/Filter press,

Visual inspection box.

Tail/Ghrit Ney 100 sq. ft Bhatti, Kadahi/S.S. Patila S.S.Storage Containers, Filtration equipment, filling tank with tap/Liquid filling machine.
Aschyotan / Netra Malham Panir/Karn Bindu/Nasabindu 100 sq. ft Hot air oven electrically heated with thermostatic control, kettle gas or electrically heated with suitable mixing arrangements, collation mill, or ointment mill, tube filling equipment, mixing and storage tanks of stainless steel or of other suitable material sintered glass funnel, seitz filter or filter candle, liquid filling equipment, autoclave.
Each manufacturing unit will have a separate area for Bhatti, furnace boilers, puta, etc. This will have proper ventilation, removal of smoke, prevention of flies, insets, dust etc. The furnace 200 sq. ft section could have tin roof.

B. LIST OF MACHINERY, EQUIPMENT AND MINIMUM MANUFACTURING
PREMISES REQUIRED FOR THE MANUFACTURE OF VARIOUS
CATEGORIES OF UNANI SYSTEM OF MEDICINES

One machine indicated for one category of medicine could be used for the manufacturing of other category of medicine also. Similarly some of the manufacturing areas like powdering, furnace, packing of liquids could also be shared for these items.

Sl.No. Category of Medicine Minimum manufacturing space required Machinery/equipment recommended (1) (2) (3) (4) 1200 square feet covered area with separate cabins, partitions for each activity. If Ayurveda / Siddha medicines are also manufactured in same premises an additional area of 400 square feet will be required.

Itrifal Tirya/majoon/ Laooq/Jawarish Khamiras 100 sq. feet Grinder/ Pulveriser, Sieves, powder mixer (if required), S.S. Patilas, Bhatti and other accessories, plant mixer for Khamiras.
Arq.
100 sq. feet Distillation Plant (garembic) S.S. storage tank, Boiling Vessel, Gravity filter, Bottle filling machine, Bottle washing machine, Bottle drier.
Habb (Pills) and tablets.
100 sq. feet Ball Mill, Mass Mixer/Powder mixer, Granulator drier, tablet compressing machine, pill/vati cutting machine, stainless steal trays/ container for storage and sugar coating, polishing pan in case of sugar-coated tablets, mechanized chattoo, (for mixing guggul) where required.

Sufoof (Powder) 200 sq. feet Grinder / pulveriser, Sieves, Trays, Scoops, Powder mixer (where required).
Raughan (oils) (Crushing and boiling) 100 sq. feet Oil Expeller, S.S. Patilas Oil filter bottle, Filling machine, Bottle drier, Bhatti.
Shiyaf, Surma, Kajal 100 sq. feet End runner, mixing S.S. Vessel..
7. Marham, Zimad

(Ointment)

8. Qurs (Tab.) 100 sq. feet

100 sq. feet Kharal, Bhatti, End runner, Grinder, Pulveriser, Triple Roller Mill (if required).

Grinder/Pulveriser, Sieves, Powder mixer (where needed), Granulator, Drier, Tablet Compressing Machine, Die punches Trays, O.T. Apparatus, Balance with weights, Scoops, Sugar Coating Pan, polishing pan, Heater.

9. Kushta 100 sq. feet Bhatti, Kharal, Sil Batta, Earthen pots.

10. Murabba 100 sq. feet. Aluminium Vessels 50-100kgs.
Capacity, Gendna, Bhatti.

Capsule 100 sq. feet Pulveriser, Powder mixer (where needed), capsule filling machine, Air conditioner, Dehumidifier, Balance with weights, storage containers, glass.

Sharbat and Joshanda 100 sq. feet Tinctum Press, exhaust fan fitted, Bhatti section, Bottle washing machine, Filter Press Gravity filter, Liquid filling tank with tap/liquid filling machine, hot air oven electrically heated with thermostatic control, kettle.

Qutoor-eChashm and Marham(Eye drops, eye ointment)

100 sq. feet Hot air oven electrically heated with thermostatic control, kettle Each manufacturing unit will have a separate area for Bhatti, furnaces, boilers, putta,etc.
This will have proper ventilation,removal of smoke, prevention of flies, insects, dust, etc.
200 sq. feet

C. LIST OF EQUIPMENT RECOMMENDED FOR IN-HOUSE QUALITY CONTROL
SECTION

(Alternatively, unit can get testing done from the Government approved laboratory).

(A) CHEMISTRY SECTION (B) PHARMACOGNOSY SECTION

Alcohol Determination Apparatus (complete set) Volatile Oil Determination Apparatus.
Boiling Point Determination Apparatus.
Melting Point Determination Apparatus.
Refractometer.
Polarimeter.
Viscometer.
Tablet Disintegration Apparatus.
Moisture Meter.
Muffle Furnace.
Electronic Balance.
Magnetic Stirrer.
Hot Air Oven.
Refrigerator.
Glass/Steel Distillation Apparatus.
LPG Gas Cylinders with Burners.
Water Bath (Temperature controlled.) Heating Mantles/ Hot Plates.
TLC Apparatus with all accessories (Manual) Paper Chromatography apparatus with accessories.
Sieve size 10 to120 with Sieve shaker.
Centrifuge Machine.
Dehumidifier.
pH Meter.
Limit Test Apparatus.

Microscope Binoculor.
Dissecting Microscope.
Microtome.
Physical Balance.
Aluminium Slide Trays.
Stage Micrometer.
Camera Lucida (Prism and Mirror Type).
Chemicals, Glassware etc.

1[D. SUPPLEMENTARY GUIDELINES FOR MANUFACTURING OF RASAUSHADHIES OR RASAMARUNTHUKAL AND KUSHTAJAT (HERBOMINERAL-METALLIC COMPOUNDS) OF AYURVEDA, SIDDHA AND UNANI
MEDICINES

These guidelines are intended to complement those provided above and should be read in conjunction with the parent guidelines. The supplementary guidelines are to provide general and minimum technical requirements for quality assurance and control in manufacturing Rasaushadhis or Rasamarunthukal and Kushtajat (Herbo-mineral-metallic formulations). These supplementary guidelines deal with Bhasmas, Sindura, Pishti, Kajjali, Khalviya Ras, Kupipakwa, Rasayan, Parpati, Potali Rasa, Satwa (of Metals and Minerals origin) Druti Parpam, Karpu, and Kushta etc. used in Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Systems of medicine.
The supplementary GMP guidelines for Rasaushadhi or Rasamarunthukal and Kushtajat are needed to establish the authenticity of raw drug, minerals and metals, inprocess validation and quality control parameters to ensure that these formulations are processed and prepared in accordance with classical texts and for which safety measures are complied. Only those manufacturing units which have Good Manufacturing Practices for ASU drugs and supplementary certificate for Rasaushadhi or Rasamarunthukal and Kushtajat formulations shall be allowed to manufacture th e same. Supplementary Good Manufactur ing Pr actices Certificate for Rasaushadhies shall be issued by the State Licensing Authority only after thorough inspection by an expert team including Rasashastra experts nominated by the Department of AYUSH.

2. Manufacturing Process Areas :- For the manufacture of Bhasma and Kupipakawa and Rasaushadhi preparations made from metals and minerals the following specific areas shall be provided, which should be completely segregated from the production area used for preparation of plants and animal by product based formulation to avoid cross contamination. The following exclusive areas the required for Rasaushadhies or Rasamarunthukal and Kushtajat:-

2.2 (a) Bhatti or Heating Device Section for Bhasma and Rasaushadhies :- 100 sq.
feet for heating, burning, putta and any heat related work with proper ventilation, exhaust and chimney. This could be tin shed also.
1. Ins. By G.S.R. 157(E), dated 04-03-2009

(b) Grinding, Drying and Processing Section for Bhasma and Rasaushadhies:- 100 Sq. feet (Manual or Mechanical, oven etc.). Drying 1[Shall be] done in a space which is covered by glass or other transparent material to allow entry of sunrays on the material to keep for the purpose. If drying is being done in oven the temperature of the same may be selected specific temperature.
(c) Rashaushadi Related Store :-100 Sq. feet.

The size and dimensions of each Bhatti Section would be so designed to suit the batch size or quantity of materials to be processed, keeping in mind the processing is done as per the conditions of Drug and Cosmetics Act mentioned under Schedule I official books.
In addition to the fuels prescribed in the schedule books namely coal, fire wood, cow dung cakes etc., use of other heating devices e.g. electrical heating, oil or gas fired furnaces and others Shall be] employed so as to provide the required temperature as per the nature of material and object of heating. Depending on the formulation being manufactured, manufacturers may adopt aerobic or anaerobic process. Properly baked and clean earthen pots of other crucibles and glass containers of appropriate design shall be used.
The manufacturing area should be designed with special attention to process the products that generate toxic fumes like SO2, arsenic and mercury vapor, etc. When heating and boiling of the materials is necessary, suitable ventilation and air exhaust flow mechanism should be provided to prevent accumulation of unintended fumes and vapors.
Such areas may be provided with properly designed chimneys or ducts fitted with exhaust system and suitable scrubbing system to remove fumes and smoke, so that safety of personnel and environment is taken care of.
Since processing of Rasaushadhis may introduce heavy metal contamination and cross contamination etc., therefore, cleaning of equipment is particularly important after every process by using appropriate cleaning agent which should not react with material of equipment and must be free from unwanted properties e.g. corrosiveness.

2.3 Records shall be maintained specially for temperatures attained during the entire process of Bhasmikaran, while employing different kinds of classical puta, furnaces using oil, gas or electricity. Appropriate temperature measuring instrument should be employed such as pyrometer and, pyrograph for manual reading or recording by heat sensors, connected to computer as the case may be.
In order to handle large quantities, appropriate technology like use of hand operated extruders for making chakrikas or pellets may be adopeted. However, such equipments made of aluminium or its alloys should not be used.
1. Subs. by G.S.R.Subs. by G.S.R.338(E), dated 15-04-2010.

Access to manufacturing areas shall be restricted to minimum number of authorized personnel only.

3. Quality Control :- A. Inprocess Quality Control :- The registers as indicated below should exclusively be maintained for ready reference :- (a) Shodhan Register with following details :- Sl No.
Batch No. and Size Date, time and duration Name of the Raw-material with Quality reference and quantity Quantity of Shodhana Dravya Book Reference followed Methodology (b) Bhavana and Putta Register with following details :- Sl No.
Batch No.
Date, time Name of the material and quantity of starting materials Quantity of Nirvapya Dravya Quantity of Bhavana Dravya Date and time of Starting and completion of Bhavana or Mardana and duration Type and Number of Puttas Time and Date of completion of Puttas Color and texture of the product or standards Inprocess tests followed (Bhasma Pariksha and any other tests) In case heating at a particular temperature is required, record of attainment of that temperature.

(c) Grinding Record Register:- (Finished Product / Intermediate procedure) Sl. No.
Batch No.
Date and time Name of the material and quantity Name of the equipment (SS/granite) Duration of grinding Repeat the grinding if required (Number of repetition)

(d) Packing details:- Name of Rasaushadhi Type of Dosage Form (eg. Powder, pill, tablet etc) Weight of Rasaushadhi in each unit

B. Product Quality Control:- The specifications for finished Rasaushadhi are primarily intended to define the quality rather than to establish full characterization, and should focus on those characteristics found to be useful in ensuring the quality. Consistent quality for Rasaushadhi can only be assured if the starting material-metals and minerals are used of pharmacopoeial standards. In some cases more detailed information may be needed on aspects of their process. The manufacturer will ensure in-house standards for the uniform quality of product.
Quality testing will be carried out as per official Pharmaceutica or Schedule books for texts namely, color, taste, varitaratwa, Rekhapurnatwa, Laghutva, Nirdhumatwa, Dntagre Kachakacha, Niruttha, Apunarbhava and Nischandratwa.
The Particle size of the product should be tested by adopting microscope fitted with micrometer or particle size analyzer or any appropriate other techniques. Required physiochemical characterization of the product should be undertaken by appropriate analytical equipment. The Standard Manufacturing Process of the product should be evolved/follow up. The disintegration time of pills-vati and tablets should also be recorded.

4. Product recalls:- Literature inserted inside the product package should indicate the name, address of the manufacturing unit 1[and] telephone number for reporting of any adverse drug reaction by physicians or patients. On receipt of such Adverse Drug Reaction report, it will be the responsibility of the manufacturer to ensure the recall of the product from the market.

Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) should be included for storage of recalled Rasaushadhies in a secure segregated area, complying with the requirements specified for storage till their final disposal.

5. Medical examination of the Employees:- Employees engaged in manufacturing should be medially examined periodically at least once a year for any adverse effect of the drug during manufacturing process for which necessary investigations 1[Shall be] carried out for ensuring that there is no effect of material on the vital organs of the employees. Annual examination reports of the employees shall be made available to statutory inspectors during Good Manufacturing Practices inspections.

6. Self-Inspection:- The release of Rasaushadhis should be under the control of a person who has been trained in the specific features of the processing and quality assurance of Rasaushadhis. Personnel dealing with the production and quality assurance of Rasaushadhis manufacturing section should have an adequate training in the specific subject of Rasaushadhis manufacturing. He will be at least a degree holder in Ayurvedic, Siddha / Unani medicines or B.Pharma degree holder in Ayurvedic / Siddha / Unani medicines.

7. Dosage form of Rasaushadhis:- The Rasaushadhis may be made into an acceptable dosage forms such as churna, vati, guti, tablet or capsules etc. after adding suitable permissible fillers or binding agents as permissible under the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India or Indian pharmacopoeia as updated from time to time. In such cases the label must indicate the quantity of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani medicines in one Tablet or Pill or Capsule in addition to the filler. The crystalline product may be grinded before packing in the individual dispensing size. All the Rasaushadhis or Rasamaruthukal or Kushtajat shall be packed in a dosage form which is ready for use for the consumer. Grinding and weighing of individual dose of potentially poisonous products will not be permissible in patient consumer pack. This arrangement may reduce the Adverse Drug Reaction of Rasaushadhi which takes place due to dose variation. However, for hospital bulk pack, it will not be applicable and label will clearly indicate the ―Hospital pack.‖

8. Area Specifications/ requirement for an applicant companies only to have GMP of Rasaushadhis or Rasamarunthukal and Kushtajat (Herbomineral/metallic compounds) of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani medicines:-

Sr. No.
Category of Medicine / Manufacturing area Minimum Manufacturing space required (1500 sq. ft.) Machinery equipme recommended

Pisti / grinding area for Bhasma, Pishti, Kushtajat Powdering area for raw drugs of plant origin giving in Rasaushadhis (Herbo-metalic formulations) Pills / Vati/ Gutika Matrica and tablets / Habb making area Kupi pakva / Ksara / Parpati / Lavana Bhasma Satva / Sindura Kapu / Uppa / Param / Qushta / Jawhar Receiving and storing raw material Quality Control Section Quarantine / observation Finished goods store Rejected goods store Bhatti-putta area Area for water and washing etc.
Office 100 sq. ft.

200 sq. ft.

100 sq. ft.

150 sq. ft.

200 sq. ft.

150 sq. ft.
50 sq. ft.
150 sq. ft.
50 sq. ft.
200 sq. ft.
50 sq. ft.

100 sq. ft.
Kharal/mechanized/motorized Kharal, End runner / Ball-Mill Sieves / Sifter.
Grinder / Distintegrator /Pulverisor / Powder mixer / Sieves / Sifter

Ball Mills, Mass Mixer/Powder mixer, Granulator, drier, tablet compressing machine, pill/ vati cutting machine, stainless steel trays / container for storage and sugar coating, polishing pan in case of sugar coated tablets, mechanized chatoo, (for mixing of guggulu) where required.
Bhatti, Karahi / stainless steel vessels /patila flask, Multani Matti / Plaster of Paris, Copper Rod, Earthen container, Gaj Put Bhatti, Muffle furnace (electrically operated) End / Edge Runner, Exhaust Fan, Wooden, S.S. Spatula.
TOTAL 1500 sq. ft

Note : The above requirements of machinery, equipments, space are made subject to the modification at the discretion of the Licensing Authority; if he is of the opinion that having regard to the nature and extent of the manufacturing operations it is necessary to relax or alter them in the circumstances in a particular case, 1[he may do so after recording reasons in writing]].

1. Added by G.S.R.463(E), dated 08-07-2005

1[Schedule TA (See rule 157 A)
FORM FOR RECORD OF UTILIZATION OF RAW MATERIAL BY AYURVEDA OR
SIDDHA OR UNANI LICENSED MANUFACTURING UNITS DURING THE
FINANCIAL YEAR

Identification Particulars:

Manufacturing License No ...
Issued by...

Name: ...
Address: ...
State: ... Pin Code: ...
Telephone:... Fax: ...
Email: ...
1. Quantity of Medicinal Plants/Extracts/Essential Oils/Metals/Animal By-Products Minerals Used During 1st April, to 31st March of the preceeding year (For Productions at the identified facility) (a) Herbs Used Common Name as in AFI/API* Plant’s Botanical Name Quantity Used/per annum (in Kgs.) Sources of Supply Part Used Traders/ Manufacturers Forest Collectors Cultivators Imported Total Whole plans Root Leaf Others

*Ayurvedic Formulary of India/Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India

(b) Extracts Used Name of Extracts Quantity Used/per annum (in Kgs.) Sources of Supply Common Name as in AFI/API* Botanical Name In-House Export Suppliers Imported Total

* Ayurvedic Formulary of India/Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India

(c) Metals/Minerals Used Name of Mineral Quantity Used/per annum (in Kgs.) Sources of Supply Common Name Chemical Name Manufacturers Traders (Domestic) Importers Total

1. Ins. By G.S.R. 512 (E), dated 09-07-2008

(d) Animal By-Products Used Name of By-Product Quantity Used/per annum (in Kgs.) Sources of Supply Common Name Biological/Chemical Name (if any) Manufacturers Traders (Domestic) Importers Total

2. Shortage of raw material(s)/inputs during the preceeding year.

If yes, please indicate name(s) of such raw material(s) by level of importance starting from most important to least important, reason for shortage [availability, quality or any other (please specify)] Name of Raw Materials Appro. Qty of shortage (in Kgs.) Reason Name of the drug and part used as mentioned in official formulary / Pharmacopoeial/ Schedue I books Biological/ Chemical Name (if any)

1[SCHEDULE U (See rules 74, 74A, 74B, 78 and 78A)

I. PARTICULARS TO BE SHOWN IN MANUFACTURING RECORDS

A. SUBSTANCES, OTHER THAN PARENTERAL PREPARATIONS IN GENERAL.

1. Serial number
2. Name of the product
3. Reference of Master Formula Records.
4. Lot/Batch Size.
5. Lot/Batch Number.
6. Date of commencement of manufacture and date of completion of manufacture and assigned date of expiry.
7. Name of all ingredients, specifications quantities required for the lot/Batch size and quantities actually used. All weighings and measurements shall be carried out by a responsible person and initialled by him and shall be counter-checked and signed by the competent technical staff under whose personal supervision the ingredients are used for manufacture.
8. Control Numbers of raw materials used in the formulation.
9. Date, time and duration of mixing.
10. Details of environmental controls like room temperature, relative humidity.
11.Date of granulation, wherever applicable.
12. Theoretical weight and actual weight of granules/powder blend.
13. Records of in-processes controls (Periodically whenever necessary):
(a) Uniformity of mixing.
(b) Moisture content of granules/powder in case of Tablet/Capsules.
(c) pH of solution in case of liquid.
(d) Weight variation.
(e) Disintegration time.

N Y

(f) Hardness (g) Friability test (h) Leak test in case of strip packing.
(i) Filled volume of liquids.
(j) Quantity of tablets/capsules in the final container.
(k) Content of ointment in the filled containers.

14. Date of compression in case of Tablets/date of filling in case of capsules.
15. Date of sealing/coating /polishing in case of capsules/tablets wherever applicable.
16. Reference to analytical Report number stating the result of test and analysis.
17. Separate records of the disposal of the rejected batches and of batches withdrawn from the market.
18.The theoretical yield and actual productions yield and packing particulars indicating the size and quantity of finished packings.
19. Specimen of label/strip, carton with batch coding information like Batch Number, date of manufacture, date of expiry, retail price as applicable stamped thereon and inserts used in the finished packings.
20. Signature with date of competent technical staff responsible for the manufacture.
21. Counter-signature of the head of the testing units or other approved person-in-charge of testing for having verified the batch records and for having released and batch for sale and distribution, the quantity released and date of release.
22. Date of release of finished packings and quantity released for sale and distribution.
23. Quantity transferred to warehouse.
24. For Hypodermic tablets and ophthalmic preparations, which are required to be manufactured under aseptic conditions, records shall be maintained indicating the precautions taken during the process of manufacture to ensure that aseptic conditions are maintained.

B. PARENTERAL PREPARATIONS.

1. Serial number.
2. Name of the product.
3. Reference of the master formula record.
4. Batch /Lot size.
5. Batch No. and/or Lot No.
6. Date of commencement of manufacture and date of completion.
7. Names of all ingredients, specifications and quantity required for the Lot/Batch size and quantity actually used. All weighings and measurements shall be carried out by a responsible person and initialled by him and shall be countersigned by the technical staff under whose personal supervision the stock are issued and by another competent technical staff under whose supervision the ingredients are used for manufacture.
8. Control numbers of raw materials used in the formulation.
9. Date, time and duration of mixing.
10. Details of environmental controls like temperature, humidity, microbial count in the sterile working areas.
11. pH of the solution, wherever applicable.
12. Date and method of filtration.
13. Sterility test, reference on bulk batch wherever applicable.
14. Record of check on volume filled.
15. Date of filling.
16. Records of tests employed: -

(a) To ensure that sealed ampoules are leak proof (b) To check the presence of foreign particles.
(c) Pyrogen test, wherever applicable (d) Toxicity test, wherever applicable.
17. Records of checking of instruments and apparatus of sterilization (indicators).
18. Records of cleaning and sterilization of containers and closures, if necessary.
19. Records of sterilization in case of parenteral preparations which are heat sterilized including particulars of time, temperature and pressure employed. Such records should be marked to relate to the batch sterilized.
20. Number and size of containers filled and quantity rejected.
21. The theoretical yield and actual yield and the percentage yield thereof.
22. Reference to Analytical report numbers stating whether of standard quality or otherwise.
23. Specimen of labels, cartons, etc. with Batch coding information like batch number, date of manufacture, date of expiry, as applicable, stamped thereon, and inserts used in the finished packings.
24. Signature with date of the component technical staff responsible for manufacture.
25. Particulars regarding the precautions taken during the manufacture to ensure that aseptic conditions are maintained.
26. Countersignature of head of the testing unit or person in charge of testing for having verified the documents and for having released the product for sale and distribution, the quantity released and date of release.
27. Records for having transferred to warehouse giving packings and quantities.
28. Separate records of the disposal of the rejected batches and of all batches withdrawn from the market.
29. Records of reprocessing if any and particulars of reprocessing.

II. RECORDS OF RAW MATERIALS

Records in respect of each raw material shall be maintained indicating the date of receipt, invoice number, name and address of the manufacturer/supplier, batch number, quantity received, pack size, date of manufacture, date of expiry, if any, date of analysis and release/rejection by quality control, analytical report number with special remarks, if any, quantity issued, date of issue and the particulars of the name and batch numbers of products for the manufacture of which issued and the proper disposal of the stocks.

III. PARTICULARS TO BE RECORDED IN THE ANALYTICAL RECORDS

A. TABLETS AND CAPSULES.
1. Analytical report number.
2. Name of the sample.
3. Date of receipt of sample.
4. Batch/Lot number.

5. Protocols of tests applied.

(a) Description.
(b) Identification.
(c) Uniformity of weight.
(d) Uniformity of diameter (if applicable).
(e) Disintegration test (time in minutes).
(f) Any other tests.
(g) Results of Assay.

Note: Records regarding various tests applied (including readings and calculations) should be maintained and necessary reference to these records should be entered in Col. 5 above whenever necessary.
6. Signature of the Analyst.
7. Opinion and signature of the approved Analyst.

B. PARENTERAL PREPARATIONS.

1. Analytical report number.
2. Name of the sample.
3. Batch number.
4. Date of receipt of samples.
5. Number of containers filled.
6. Number of containers received.

7. Protocols of tests applied.

(a) Clarity.
(b) pH wherever applicable.
(c) Identification.
(d) Volume in container.
(e) Sterility – (i) Bulk sample wherever applicable (ii) container sample.
(f) Pyrogen test, wherever applicable.
(g) Toxicity test, wherever applicable.
(h) Any other tests.
(i) Results of Assay.

Note: Records regarding various tests applied (including readings and calculations) should be maintained and necessary reference to these records should be entered in Col. 7 above, wherever necessary.

8. Signature of the Analyst.

9. Opinion and signature of the approved Analyst.

PYROGEN TEST:

1. Test Report Number.
2. Name of the sample.
3. Batch Number.
4. Number of rabbits used.
5. Weight of each rabbit.
6. Normal temperature of each rabbit.
7. Mean initial temperature of each rabbit.
8. Dose and volume of solution injected into each rabbit and time of injection.
9. Temperature of each rabbit noted at suitable intervals.
10. Maximum temperature.
11. Response.
12. Summed response.
13. Signature of the Analyst.
14.Opinion and signature of the approved Analyst.

TOXICITY TEST

1. Test Report Number.
2. Name of the sample.

3. Batch Number.
4. Number of mice used and weight of each mouse.
5. Strength and volume of the drugs injected.
6. Date of injection.
7. Results and remarks.
8. Signature of Analyst.
9. Opinion and signature of the approved Analyst.

C. FOR OTHER DRUGS
1. Analytical report number.
2. Name of the sample.
3. Batch/Lot number.
4. Date of receipt of sample.
5. Protocol of tests applied.

(a) Description.

(b) Identification.

(c) Any other tests.

(d) Results of Assay.
Note:Particulars regarding various tests applied (including readings and calculations) shall be maintained and necessary reference to these records shall be entered in Column 5 above, wherever necessary.
6. Signature of Analyst.
7. Opinion and signature of the approved Analyst.
D. RAW MATERIALS
1. Serial number.
2. Name of the materials.
3. Name of the manufacturer/supplier.
4. Quantity received.
5. Invoice/Challan number and date.
6. Protocols of tests applied.
Note: Particulars regarding various tests applied (including readings and calculations) shall be maintained and necessary reference to these records shall be entered in Column 6 above, wherever necessary.
E. CONTAINER, PACKING MATERIALS ETC.
1. Serial number.
2. Name of the item.
3. Name of the manufacturer/supplier.
4. Quantity received.
5. Invoice/Challan number and date
6. Results of tests applied.
Note: Particulars regarding various tests applied shall be maintained and necessary reference to these records shall be entered in Column 6 above, wherever necessary
7. Remarks.
8. Signature of the examiner.

Notes: 1. The foregoing provisions represent the minimum requirements to be complied with by the licensee. The Licensing Authority may, however, direct the nature of records to be maintained by the licensee for such products as are not covered by the categories described above.
2. The Licensing Authority may permit the licensee to maintain records in such manner as are considered satisfactory, provided the basic requirements laid down above are complied with.
3. The Licensing Authority may at its discretion direct the licensee to maintain records for such additional particulars as it may consider necessary in the circumstances of a particular case.]

[SCHEDULE U(I) (See rules 142 and 142B) I. PARTICULARS TO BE SHOWN IN THE MANUFACTURING RECORDS:

1. Serial number.
2. Name of the product.
3. Lot/Batch size.
4. Lot/Batch number.
5. Date of commencement of manufacture and date when manufacture was completed.
6. Names of all ingredients, quantities required for the lot/batch size, quantities actually used.
7. Control reference numbers in respect of raw materials used in formulation.
8. Reference to analytical report numbers.
9. Actual production and packing particulars indicating the size and quantity of finished packings.
10. Date of release of finished packing for distribution or sale.
11. Signature of the expert staff responsible for the manufacture.

II. RECORDS OF RAW MATERIALS:
Records in respect of each raw material shall be maintained indicating the quantity received, control reference number, the quantity issued from time to time, the names and batch numbers of the products for the manufacture of which the said quantity of raw material has been issued and the particulars relating to the proper disposal of the stocks.
Notes: (1) The Licensing Authority may permit the licensee to maintain records in such manner as is considered satisfactory, provided the basic requirements laid down above are complied with.
(2) The Licensing Authority may direct the licensee to maintain records for such additional particulars, as it may consider necessary in the circumstances of a particular case.]

2[SCHEDULE V ( See rule 124B)

STANDARDS FOR PATENT OR PROPRIETARY MEDICINES 3 [***] 4[2. Standards for patent or proprietary medicines, containing vitamins: Patent or proprietary medicines containing vitamins for prophylactic, therapeutic or paediatric use shall contain the vitamins in quantities not less than and not more than those specified below in single or in two divided daily doses, namely: - [see table below].
3 [***] 5[4. General Standards for Different Categories of Patent or Proprietary Medicines. - In the case of pharmaceutical products containing several active ingredients, the selection shall be such that the ingredients do not interact with one another and do not affect the safety and therapeutic efficacy of the product. The combination shall not also lead to analytical difficulties for the purpose of assaying the content of such ingredient separately. The substances added as additives shall be innocuous, shall not affect the safety or therapeutic efficacy of the active ingredients, and shall not affect the assays and identity tests in the amount present.]

1. Added by G.S.R. 1594, dt. 28-10-1976.
2. Added by G.S.R. 665, dt. 06-05-1977.
3. Omitted. G.S.R. 56(E) ,dt. 22.1.1992.
4. Added by G.S.R. No. 930 ,dt. 13-7-1978.
5. Ins. by. G.S.R. 792(E) ,dt. 17.9.1987.

Subject to the provisions of these rules, patent or proprietary medicines shall comply with the following standards, namely: -
1. Patent or proprietary medicines shall comply with the general requirements of the dosage form under which it falls as given in the Indian Pharmacopoeia. If the dosage form is not included in the Indian Pharmacopoeia, but is included in any other pharmacopoeia, prescribed for the purpose of the Second Schedule to the Act, it shall comply with the general requirements of the dosage of such pharmacopoeia. Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing requirements, general requirements shall include compliance with colour consistency, clarity, stability, freedom from contamination with foreign matter or fungal growth, defects like chipping and capping of tablets, cracking of the coating, mottled appearance and other characteristic defects that can be perceived by visual inspection.
2. Without prejudice to the generality of the following paras, dosage forms of patent or proprietary medicines shall comply with the following requirements, namely:- (a) Tablets: Medicines shall comply with requirements for tablets as laid down in the Indian Pharmacopoeia. The nature of coating shall be indicated on the label. Permitted colours may, however, be added and declared on the label. Nature of tablets, such as uncoated, sugar coated or film coated, shall be declared on the label.
1[***]

(b) Capsules : Medicines shall comply with the requirements for capsules laid down in the Indian Pharmacopoeia. However, the capsules shall be free from distortion or shape, discolouration and other physical defects like leakage of powder from joints, pinholes or cracks in the capsules;
(c) Liquid oral dosage forms: Emulsions and suspensions shall disperse uniformly on shaking.
Homogeneous solutions shall contain no sediments. The volume of the product (net content) in the container shall be not less than the labelled volume. The limit for ethanol content of pharmaceutical products shall be not less than 90 per cent and not more than 110 per cent of the labelled contents.
(d) Injections: Medicines shall comply with the requirements for injections as laid down in the Indian Pharmacopoeia.
(e) Ointments: Medicines shall comply with the requirements for injections as laid down in the Indian Pharmacopoeia.

3. The content of active ingredients, other than vitamins, enzymes and antibiotics, in patent or proprietary medicines shall be not less than 90 per cent and not more than 110 per cent of the labelled content; however, for enzymes and vitamins, only for lower limit of 90 per cent shall apply. In all dry formulations containing antibiotics, the limit shall be 90 to 130 per cent of the labelled contents and in case of liquid antibiotic formulations, the limit shall be 90 to 140 per cent of labelled contents.
Fiducial limits for error for microbiological assay of antibiotics may be estimated depending upon the design of assay procedure. Methods, used for assaying active ingredients shall employ the same basic principles and shall use same organisms as given in the latest edition of the Indian Pharmacopoeia or shall follow any other methods as approved by the authority competent to grant licence to manufacture.

1. Omitted. by G.S.R. 59(E) ,dt. 22.1.1992.

4. All patent or proprietary medicines containing aspirin shall be subjected to ―Free Salicylic Acid Test‖ and the limit of such acid shall be 0.75 per cent. Except in case of soluble type aspirin in which case the limit of such acid shall be 3 per cent.
5. Patent or proprietary medicine to be tested under the provisions of rule 121-A for pyrogen shall be tested by injecting into rabbits not less than the human dose of the medicine based on body weight of a 60 kg. human being. Methodology and limits shall be based on the method recorded in the Indian Pharmacopoeia. Dose selected shall be indicated in the protocol but the dose shall be not greater than 5 times the human dose based on body weight of 60 kg for man.
6. In injectable patent or proprietary medicines, the test for freedom from toxicity, shall be performed as described in the Indian Pharmacopoeia. Dose selected shall be indicated in the protocol but the dose shall not be less than five times the human dose based on body weight of 60 kg. human being.]

Vitamin Unit Patent or proprietary Patent or proprietary Patent or proprietary medicines containing Medicines containing medicines containing vitamins for paediatric use.
Vitamins for prophylactic vitamins for therapeutic Use.
(in single dose or in two divided doses) per daily dose

For adults For infants less than For children above one one year. year up to adults

5 6 Vitamin A.
I.U Not less than 1600 and not more than 2,500 Not less than 5000 and not more than 10,000 Not less than 750 and not Not less than 1500 and more more than 3,000 than 5,000 Vitamin D.
I.U Not less than 100 and not more than 200.
Not less than 400 and not more than 1,000 Not less than 200 and not Not less than 100 and more than more than 400 400 Vitamin B1 mg.
Not less than 1 and not more than 2 Not less than 4.5 and not more than 10 Not less than 0.5 and more Not less than 1 and not more than 1 than 4.5 Vitamin B2 mg Not less than 1 and not more than 3 Not less than 5 and not more than 10 Not less than 0.5 and not Not less than 1 and not more more than 1.5 than 5.
Vitamin B6 mg Not less than 0.5 and not more than 1.5 Not less than 1.5 and not more than 3 Not less than 0.5 and not Not less than 1 and not more more than 1.5 than 3 Niacinamide mg Not less than 15 and not more than 26 Not less than 45 and not more than 100 Not less than 5 and not more Not less than 10 and not more than 15 than 40.

d-Pantothenic mg Not less than 1 and not more Not less than 5 and not more Not less than 1 and not more Not less than 2.5 and not more acid or its salts than 5 than 50 than 3 than 10 and panthenol.

Folic acid mg.
Not less than 50 and not more Not less than 1000 and not more Not less than 25 and not Not less than 100 and not more than 300 than 1500 more than 100 than 500

1 2 3 4 5 6

Vitamin B12 mcg Not less than 0.5 and not more Not less than 5 and not more Not less than 1 and not more Not less than 1 and not more than 1 than 15 than 3 than 5 Vitamin C mg Not less than 25 and not more than 50 Not less than 75 and not more than 150 Not less than 20 and not more than 40 Not less than 30 and not more than 80 Vitamin E I.U Not less than 5 and not more than 10 Not less than 15 and not more than 25 Not less than 2.5 and not more than 10 Not less than 5 and not more than 20.

Notes:
(1) Patent or proprietary medicines containing vitamins intended for prophylactic, therapeutic or paediatric use shall bear on the label the words ―For Prophylactic Use‖ ― For Therapeutic Use,‖ or ―For Paediatric Use‖ as the case may be. In the case of paediatric preparations the age of the infant or the child for whose use it is intended, shall be given in addition to the particulars required to be given under these rules.
(2)The above standards shall not apply to any preparation containing a single vitamin only and also to any preparation containing vitamins intended for parenteral use.
Provided, however, that in the case of patent or proprietary medicines containing vitamins which are intended for the treatment of certain specific conditions or diseases, the Licensing Authority specified in clause (b) of rule 21, may permit the addition of vitamins therein in relaxation of the limits specified above, if satisfactory evidence is produced in justification of such relaxation.

1. Subs. by G.S.R. dated 22-12-2009

1[***]

2[SCHEDULE X [See Rules 23, 61, 75, 97 and 105A]

Amobarbital Glutethimide Pentobarbital 3[Ketamine hydrochloride] Amphetamine Meprobamate Phencyclidine Barbital Methamphetamine Phenometrazine Cyclobarbital 4[***] 5[***] Dexamphetamine Methylphenidate Secobarbital Ethclorvynol Methylphenobarbital

Note: 1. Any stereoisometric form of the substance specified in this Schedule, any salt of the substance and preparation containing such substances are also covered by this Schedule.
2. Preparations containing the above substances are also covered by this Schedule.
Provided, however, preparations containing Meprobamate

[***] in combination with other drugs may be exempted by the Licensing Authority specified in clause (b) of rule 21, from the provisions of this Schedule, if satisfactory evidence is adduced that these preparations are not liable to be misused.]

1.Omitted by. G.S.R. 94(E) ,dt. 8.5. 2000 2 Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E) ,dt. 22.6.1982
3. Ins. by G.S.R. 724(E) ,dt. 07.11.2013
4. Omitted by G.S.R. 647(E) ,dt. 28.10.1998.
5.Omitted by. G.S.R. 673(E) ,dt. 27.10.1993.

1[SCHEDULE Y (See rules 122A, 122B, 122D, 122DA, 122DAA and 122E)

REQUIREMENTS AND GUIDELINES FOR PERMISSION TO IMPORT AND / OR
MANUFACTURE OF NEW DRUGS FOR SALE OR TO UNDERTAKE CLINICAL
TRIALS
1. Application for permission.- (1) Application for permission to import or manufacture new drugs for sale or to undertake clinical trials shall be made in Form 44 accompanied with following data in accordance with the appendices, namely:-

(i) chemical and pharmaceutical information as prescribed in item 2 of Appendix I;
(ii) animal pharmacology data as prescribed in item 3 of Appendix I and Appendix IV;
(a) specific pharmacological actions as prescribed in item 3.2 of Appendix I, and demonstrating, therapeutic potential for humans shall be described according to the animal models and species used. Wherever possible, dose-response relationships and ED50s shall be submitted. Special studies conducted to elucidate mode of action shall also be described (Appendix IV);
(b) general pharmacological actions as prescribed in item 3.3 of Appendix I and item
1.2 of Appendix IV;
(c) pharmacokinetic data related to the absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion of the test substance as prescribed in item 3.5 of Appendix I. Wherever possible, the drug effects shall be corelated to the plasma drug concentrations;

(iii) animal toxicology data as prescribed in item 4 of Appendix I and Appendix III;
(iv) human Clinical Pharmacology Data as prescribed in items 5, 6 and 7 of Appendix I and as stated below:- (a) for new drug substances discovered in India, clinical trials are required to be carried out in India right from Phase I and data should be submitted as required under items 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 (data, if any, from other countries), and 9 of Appendix I;
(b) for new drug substances discovered in countries other than India, Phase I data as required under items 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 (data from other countries) and 9 of Appendix I should be submitted along with the application. After submission of Phase I data generated outside India to the Licensing Authority, permission may be granted to repeat Phase I trials and/or to conduct Phase II trials and subsequently Phase III trials concurrently with other global trials for that drug. Phase III trials are required to be conducted in India before permission to market the drug in India is granted;
(c) the data required will depend upon the purpose of the new drug application . The number of study subjects and sites to be involved in the conduct of clinical trial will depend upon the nature and objective of the study. Permission to carry out these trials shall generally be given in stages, considering the data emerging from earlier Phase(s);
(d) application for permission to initiate specific phase of clinical trial should also accompany Investigator‘s brochure, proposed protocol (Appendix X), case record form, study subject‘s informed consent document(s) (Appendix V), investigator‘s undertaking (Appendix VII) and ethics committee clearance, if available (Appendix VIII);
1. Subs. G.S.R. 32(E), dt. 20.1.2005.

(e) reports of clinical studies submitted under items 5-8 of Appendix I should be in consonance with the format prescribed in Appendix II of this Schedule. The study report shall be certified by the Principal Investigator or, if no Principal Investigator is designated, then by each of the Investigators participating in the study. The certification should acknowledge the contents of the report, the accurate presentation of the study as undertaken, and express agreement with the conclusions. Each page should be numbered;
(v) regulatory status in other countries as prescribed in item 9.2 of Appendix I, including Information in respect of restrictions imposed, if any, on the use of the drug in other countries, e.g. dosage limits, exclusion of certain age groups, warning about adverse drug reactions,.etc.
(item 9.2 of Appendix I). Likewise, if the drug has been withdrawn in any country by the manufacturer or by regulatory authorities, such information should also be furnished along with the reasons and their relevance, if any, to India. This information must continue to be submitted by the sponsor to the Licensing Authority during the course of marketing of the drug in India;
(vi) the full prescribing information should be submitted as part of the new drug application for marketing as prescribed in item 10 of Appendix I. The prescribing information (package insert) shall comprise the following sections: generic name; composition; dosage form/s, indications; dose and method of administration; use in special populations (such as pregnant women, lactating women, paediatric patients, geriatric patients etc.); contra-indications;
warnings; precautions; drug interactions; undesirable effects; overdose; pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties; incompatibilities; shelf-life; packaging information; storage and handling instructions. All package inserts, promotional literature and patient education material subsequently produced are required to be consistent with the contents of the approved full prescribing information. The drafts of label and carton texts should comply with provisions of rules 96 and 97. After submission and approval by the Licensing Authority, no changes in the package insert shall be effected without such changes being approved by the Licensing Authority; and (vii) complete testing protocol/s for quality control testing together with a complete impurity profile and release specifications for the product as prescribed in item 11 of Appendix I should be submitted as part of new drug application for marketing. Samples of the pure drug substance and finished product are to be submitted when desired by the regulatory authority.
(2) If the study drug is intended to be imported for the purposes of examination, test or analysis, the application for import of small quantities of drugs for such purpose should also be made in Form 12.
(3) For drugs indicated in life threatening / serious diseases or diseases of special relevance to the Indian health scenario, the toxicological and clinical data requirements may be abbreviated, deferred or omitted, as deemed appropriate by the Licensing Authority.

2. Clinical Trial:
(1) Approval for clinical trial

(i) Clinical trial on a new drug shall be initiated only after the permission has been granted by the Licensing Authority under rule 21 (b), and the approval obtained from the respective ethics committee (s). The Licensing Authority as defined shall be informed of the approval of the respective institutional ethics committee(s) as prescribed in Appendix VIII, and the trial initiated at each respective site only after obtaining such an approval for that site. The trial site(s) may accept the approval granted to the protocol by the ethics committee of another trial site or the approval granted by an independent ethics committee (constituted as per Appendix VIII), provided that the approving ethics committee(s) is/are willing to accept their responsibilities for the study at such trial site(s) and the trial site(s) is/are willing to accept such an arrangement and that the protocol version is same at all trial sites.

(ii) All trial Investigator(s) should possess appropriate qualifications, training and experience and should have access to such investigational and treatment facilities as are relevant

to the proposed trial protocol. A qualified physician (or dentist, when appropriate) who is an investigator or a sub-investigator for the trial, should be responsible for all trial-related medical (or dental) decisions. Laboratories used for generating data for clinical trials should be compliant with Good Laboratory Practices. If services of a laboratory or a facilities outside the country are to be availed, its/their name(s), address(s) and specific services to be used should be stated in the protocol to avail Licensing Authority‘s permission to send clinical trial related samples to such laboratory(ies) and/or facility(ies). In all cases, information about laboratory(ies) / facilities to be used for the trial, if other than those at the investigation site(s), should be furnished to the Licensing Authority prior to initiation of trial at such site(s).

(iii) Protocol amendments if become necessary before initiation or during the course of a clinical trial, all such amendments should be notified to the Licensing Authority in writing along with the approval by the ethics committee which has granted the approval for the study.
No deviations from or changes to the protocol should be implemented without prior written approval of the ethics committee and the Licensing Authority except when it is necessary to eliminate immediate hazards to the trial Subject(s) or when change(s) involve(s) only logistic or administrative aspects of the trial. All such exceptions must be immediately notified to the ethics committee as well as to the Licensing Authority. Administrative and/or logistic changes in the protocol should be notified to the Licensing Authority within 30 days.
(2) Responsibilities of Sponsor:
(i) The clinical trial Sponsor is responsible for implementing and maintaining quality assurance systems to ensure that the clinical trial is conducted and data generated, documented and reported in compliance with the protocol and Good Clinical Practice (GCP) Guidelines issued by the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Directorate General of Health Services, Government of India as well as with all applicable statutory provisions. Standard operating procedures should be documented to ensure compliance with GCP and applicable regulations.
(ii) Sponsors are required to submit a status report on the clinical trial to the Licensing Authority at the prescribed periodicity.
(iii) In case of studies prematurely discontinued for any reason including lack of commercial interest in pursuing the new drug application, a summary report should be submitted within 3 months. The summary report should provide a brief description of the study, the number of patients exposed to the drug, dose and duration of exposure, details of adverse drug reactions (Appendix XI), if any, and the reason for discontinuation of the study or nonpursuit of the new drug application;
1[(iv) Any report of the serious adverse event, after due analysis shall be forwarded by the sponsor to the Licensing Authority as referred to in clause (b) of rule 21, the Chairman of the Ethics Committee and the head of the institution where the trial has been conducted, within fourteen days of the occurrence of the serious adverse event.] 2[(v) in case of injury or death occurring to the clinical trial subject, the Sponsor (whether a pharmaceutical company or an Institution) or his representative, whosoever, had obtained permission from the Licensing Authority for conduct of the clinical trial, shall make payment for medical management of the subject and also provide financial compensation for the clinical trial related injury or death in the manner as prescribed in Appendix XII;
2[(vi) the Sponsor (whether a pharmaceutical company or an Institution) or his representative, whosoever had obtained permission from the Licensing Authority for conduct of the clinical trial, shall submit details of compensation provided or paid for clinical trial related injury or death, to the Licensing Authority within thirty days of the receipt of the order of the Licensing Authority.]

2. Ins. By G.S.R. 53(E) dated 30-1-2013

1[(3)(i)] Responsibilities of the Investigator(s):
The Investigator(s) shall be responsible for the conduct of the trial according to the protocol and the GCP Guidelines and also for compliance as per the undertaking given in Appendix VII. Standard operating procedures are required to be documented by the investigators for the tasks performed by them. During and following a subject‘s participation in a trial, the investigator should ensure that adequate medical care is provided to the participant for any adverse events. Investigator(s) shall report all serious and unexpected adverse events to the 2[Licensing Authority defined under clause (b) of rule 21, the Sponsor or his repeesentative, whosoever had obtained permission from the Licensing Authority for conduct of the clinical trial, and the Ethics Committee that accorded approval to the study protocol, within twenty four hours of their occurance. 3[In case, the Investigator fails to report any serious adverse event within the stipulated period, he shall have to furnish the reason for the delay to the satisfaction of the Licensing Authority along with the report of the serious adverse event. The report of the serious adverse event, after due analysis, shall be forwarded by the Investigator to the Licensing Authority as referred to in clause (b) of rule 21, the Chairman of the Ethics Committee and the Head of the institution where the trial has been conducted within fourteen days of the occurrence of the serious adverse event.]].
4[(ii)The Investigator shall provide information to the clinical trial subject through informed consent process as provided in Appendix V about the essential elements of the clinical trial and the subject‘s right to claim compensation in case of trial related injury or death. He shall also inform the subject or his/her nominees(s) of their rights to contact the Sponsor or his representative whosoever had obtained permission from the Licensing Authority for conduct of the clinical trial for the purpose of making claims in the case of trial related injury or death.]

(4) Informed Consent:
(i) In all trials, a freely given, informed, written consent is required to be obtained from each study subject. The Investigator must provide information about the study verbally as well as using a patient information sheet, in a language that is non-technical and understandable by the study subject. The Subject‘s consent must be obtained in writing using an ̳Informed Consent Form‘. Both the patient information sheet as well as the Informed Consent Form should have been approved by the ethics committee and furnished to the Licensing Authority. Any changes in the informed consent documents should be approved by the ethics committee and submitted to the Licensing Authority before such changes are implemented.
(ii) Where a subject is not able to give informed consent (e.g. an unconscious person or a minor or those suffering from severe mental illness or disability), the same may be obtained from a legally acceptable representative (a legally acceptable representative is a person who is able to give consent for or authorize an intervention in the patient as provided by the law(s) of India). If the Subject or his/her legally acceptable representative is unable to read/write – an impartial witness should be present during the entire informed consent process who must append his/her signatures to the consent form.
(iii) A checklist of essential elements to be included in the study subject‘s informed consent document as well as a format for the Informed Consent Form for study Subjects is given in Appendix V.
1. Sub-para (3) renumbered as sub-para, (3)(i) thereof by G.S.R 53(E), dated 30-01-2013.
2. Subs. by G.S.R. 53(E), dated 30-01-2013.
3. Subs. by G.S.R. 889(E), dated 12-12-2014.
4. Ins. by G.S.R. 53(E), dated 30-01-2013.

(5) Responsibilities of the Ethics Committee:
(i) It is the responsibility of the ethics committee that reviews and accords its approval to a trial protocol to safeguard the rights, safety and well being of all trial subjects. The ethics committee should exercise particular care to protect the rights, safety and well being of all vulnerable subjects participating in the study, e.g., members of a group with hierarchical structure (e.g. prisoners, armed forces personnel, staff and students of medical, nursing and pharmacy academic institutions), patients with incurable diseases, umemployed or impoverished persons, patients in emergency situation, ethnic minority groups, homeless persons, nomads, refugees, minors or others incapable of personally giving consent. Ethics committee(s) should get document ̳standard operating procedures‘ and should maintain a record of its proceedings.
(ii) Ethics Committee(s) should make, at appropriate intervals, an ongoing review of the trials for which they review the protocol(s). Such a review may be based on the periodic study progress reports furnished by the investigators and/or monitoring and internal audit reports furnished by the Sponsor and/or by visiting the study sites.
(iii) In case an ethics committee revokes its approval accorded to a trial protocol, it must record the reasons for doing so and at once communicate such a decision to the Investigator as well as to the Licensing Authority.
1[(iv) In case of serious adverse event occurring to the clinical trial subject, the Ethics Committee shall forward its report on the serious adverse event, after due analysis, along with its opinion on the financial compensation, if any, to be paid by the Sponsor or his representative, whosoever had obtained permission from the Licensing Authority as referred to in clause (b) of rule 21 for conducting the clinical trial, to the Licensing Authority within thirty days of the occurrence of the serious adverse event.
2[5(A). Serious Adverse Events:
(1) A serious adverse event is an untoward medical occurrence during clinical trial that is associated with death, in patient hospitalization (in case the study was being conducted on outpatient), prolongation of hospitalization (in case the study was being conducted on in-patient), persistent or significant disability or incapacity, a congenital anomaly or birth defect or is otherwise life threatening.
(2) The Investigator shall report all serious 3[***] adverse events to the Licensing Authority as defined under clause (b) of Rule 21, the Sponsor or his representative, whosoever had obtained permission from the Licensing Authority for conduct of the clinical trial and the Ethics Committee that accorded approval to the study protocol, within twenty four hours of their occurrence as per Appendix XI and the said Licensing Authority shall determine the cause of injury or death as per the procedure prescribed under Appendix XII and pass orders as deemed necessary. 4[In case, the Investigator fails to report any serious adverse event within the stipulated period, he shall have to furnish the reason for the delay to the satisfaction of the Licensing Authority along with the report of the serious adverse event.

2. Ins. by G.S.R. 53(E) dated 30-01-2013.
3. The words ―and unexpected‖omitted by G.S.R. 889(E) dated 12-12-2014.
4. Ins. by G.S.R. 889 (E) dated 12-12-2014.

(6) Human Pharmacology (Phase I):
(i) The objective of studies in this Phase is the estimation of safety and tolerability with the initial administration of an investigational new drug into human(s). Studies in this Phase of development usually have non-therapeutic objectives and may be conducted in healthy volunteers subjects or certain types of patients. Drugs with significant potential toxicity e.g. cytotoxic drugs are usually studied in patients. Phase I trials should preferably be carried out by Investigators trained in clinical pharmacology with access to the necessary facilities to closely observe and monitor the Subjects.
(ii) Studies conducted in Phase I, usually intended to involve one or a combination of the following objectives:- (a) Maximum tolerated dose: To determine the tolerability of the dose range expected to be needed for later clinical studies and to determine the nature of adverse reactions that can be expected. These studies include both single and multiple dose administration.
(b) Pharmacokinetics, i.e., characterization of a drug's absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion. Although these studies continue throughout the development plan, they should be performed to support formulation development and determine pharmacokinetic parameters in different age groups to support dosing recommendations.
(c) Pharmacodynamics: Depending on the drug and the endpoints studied, pharmacodynamic studies and studies relating to drug blood levels (pharmacokinetic/ pharmacodynamic studies) may be conducted in healthy volunteer Subjects or in patients with the target disease. If there are appropriate validated indicators of activity and potential efficacy, pharmacodynamic data obtained from patients may guide the dosage and dose regimen to be applied in later studies.
(d) Early Measurement of Drug Activity: Preliminary studies of activity or potential therapeutic benefit may be conducted in Phase I as a secondary objective. Such studies are generally performed in later Phases but may be appropriate when drug activity is readily measurable with a short duration of drug exposure in patients at this early stage.

(7) Therapeutic exploratory trials (Phase II):
(i) The primary objective of Phase II trials is to evaluate the effectiveness of a drug for a particular indication or indications in patients with the condition under study and to determine the common short-term side-effects and risks associated with the drug. Studies in Phase II should be conducted in a group of patients who are selected by relatively narrow criteria leading to a relatively homogeneous population. These studies should be closely monitored. An important goal for this Phase is to determine the dose(s) and regimen for Phase III trials. Doses used in Phase II are usually (but not always) less than the highest doses used in Phase I.
(ii) Additional objectives of Phase II studies can include evaluation of potential study endpoints, therapeutic regimens (including concomitant medications) and target populations (e.g.
mild versus severe disease) for further studies in Phase II or III. These objectives may be served by exploratory analyses, examining subsets of data and by including multiple endpoints in trials.
(iii) If the application is for conduct of clinical trials as a part of multi-national clinical development of the drug, the number of sites and the patients as well as the justification for undertaking such trials in India shall be provided to the Licensing Authority.

(8) Therapeutic confirmatory trials (Phase III):
(i) Phase III studies have primary objective of demonstration or confirmation of therapeutic benefit(s). Studies in Phase III are designed to confirm the preliminary evidence accumulated in Phase II that a drug is safe and effective for use in the intended indication and recipient population. These studies should be intended to provide an adequate basis for marketing approval. Studies in Phase III may also further explore the dose-response relationships (relationships among dose, drug concentration in blood and clinical response), use of the drug in wider populations, in different stages of disease, or the safety and efficacy of the drug in combination with other drug(s).
(ii) For drugs intended to be administered for long periods, trials involving extended exposure to the drug are ordinarily conducted in Phase III, although they may be initiated in Phase II. These studies carried out in Phase III complete the information needed to support adequate instructions for use of the drug (prescribing information).
(iii) For new drugs approved outside India, Phase III studies need to be carried out primarily to generate evidence of efficacy and safety of the drug in Indian patients when used as recommended in the prescribing information. Prior to conduct of Phase III studies in Indian subjects, Licensing Authority may require pharmacokinetic studies to be undertaken to verify that the data generated in Indian population is in conformity with the data already generated abroad.
(iv) If the application is for the conduct of clinical trials as a part of multi-national clinical development of the drug, the number of sites and patients as well as the justification for undertaking such trials in India should be provided to the Licensing Authority along with the application.

(9) Post Marketing Trials (Phase IV):
Post Marketing trials are studies (other than routine surveillance) performed after drug approval and related to the approved indication(s). These trials go beyond the prior demonstration of the drug‘s safety, efficacy and dose definition. These trials may not be considered necessary at the time of new drug approval but may be required by the Licensing Authority for optimizing the drug's use. They may be of any type but should have valid scientific objectives. Phase IV trials include additional drug-drug interaction(s), doseresponse or safety studies and trials designed to support use under the approved indication(s), e.g.
mortality/morbidity studies, epidemiological studies etc.

3. Studies in special populations:

Information supporting the use of the drug in children, pregnant women, nursing women, elderly patients, patients with renal or other organ systems failure, and those on specific concomitant medication is required to be submitted if relevant to the clinical profile of the drug and its anticipated usage pattern. Any claim sought to be made for the drug product that is not based on data submitted under preceding items of this Schedule should be supported by studies included under this item of the Schedule (Appendix I, item 8.3).
(1) Geriatrics:
Geriatric patients should be included in Phase III clinical trials (and in Phase II trials, at the Sponsor's option) in meaningful numbers, if- (a) the disease intended to be treated is characteristically a disease of aging; or (b) the population to be treated is known to include substantial numbers of geriatric patients; or

(c) when there is specific reason to expect that conditions common in the elderly are likely to be encountered; or (d) when the new drug is likely to alter the geriatric patient's response (with regard to safety or efficacy) compared with that of the non-geriatric patient.
(2) Paediatrics:
(i) The timing of paediatric studies in the new drug development program will depend on the medicinal product, the type of disease being treated, safety considerations, and the efficacy and safety of available treatments. For a drug expected to be used in children, evaluations should be made in the appropriate age group. When clinical development is to include studies in children, it is usually appropriate to begin with older children before extending the trial to younger children and then infants.
(ii) If the new drug is for diseases predominantly or exclusively affecting paediatric patients, clinical trial data should be generated in the paediatric population except for initial safety and tolerability data, which will usually be obtained in adults unless such initial safety studies in adults would yield little useful information or expose them to inappropriate risk.
(iii) If the new drug is intended to treat serious or life-threatening diseases, occurring in both adults and paediatric patients, for which there are currently no or limited therapeutic options, paediatric population should be included in the clinical trials early, following assessment of initial safety data and reasonable evidence of potential benefit. In circumstances where this is not possible, lack of data should be justified in detail.
(iv) If the new drug has a potential for use in paediatric patients – Paediatric studies should be conducted. These studies may be initiated at various phases of clinical development or after post marketing survelliance in adults if a safety concern exists. In cases where there is limited paediatric data at the time of submission of application – more data in paediatric patients would be expected after marketing authorisation for use in children is granted.
(v) The paediatric studies should include – (a) clinical trials, (b) relative bioequivalence comparisons of the paediatric formulation with the adult formulation performed in adults, and (c) definitive pharmacokinetic studies for dose selection across the age ranges of paediatric patients in whom the drug is likely to be used. These studies should be conducted in the paediatric patient population with the disease under study.
(vi) If the new drug is a major therapeutic advance for the paediatric population – the studies should begin early in the drug development , and this data should be submitted with the new drug application.
(vii) Paediatric Subjects are legally unable to provide written informed consent, and are dependent on their parent(s)/ legal guardian to assume responsibility for their participation in clinical studies. Written informed consent should be obtained from the parent/ legal guardian.
However, all paediatric participants should be informed to the fullest extent possible about the study in a language and in terms that they are able to understand. Where appropriate, paediatric participants should additionally assent to enrol in the study. Mature minors and adolescents should personally sign and date a separately designed written assent form.
Although a participant‘s wish to withdraw from a study must be respected, there may be circumstances in therapeutic studies for serious or life-threatening diseases in which, in the opinion of the Investigator and parent(s)/ legal guardian, the welfare of a pediatric patient would

be jeopardized by his or her failing to participate in the study. In this situation, continued parental/ legal guardian consent should be sufficient to allow participation in the study.
(viii) For clinical trials conducted in the paediatric population, the reviewing ethics committee should include members who are knowledgeable about pediatric, ethical, clinical and psychosocial issues.
(3) Pregnant or nursing women:
(i) Pregnant or nursing women should be included in clinical trials only when the drug is intended for use by pregnant/nursing women or foetuses/nursing infants and where the data generated from women who are not pregnant or nursing, is not suitable.
(ii) For new drugs intended for use during pregnancy, follow-up data (pertaining to a period appropriate for that drug) on the pregnancy, foetus and child will be required.
Where applicable, excretion of the drug or its metabolites into human milk should be examined and the infant should be monitored for predicted pharmacological effects of the drug.
1[(4) Post Marketing Surveillance:

(i) The applicant shall have a pharmacovigilance system in place for collecting, processing and forwarding the report to the licensing authority for information on adverse drug reactions emerging from the use of the drug manufactured or marketed by the applicant in the country.
(ia) The system shall be managed by qualified and trained personnel and the officer incharge of collection and processing of data shall be a medical officer or a pharmacist trained in collection and analysis of adverse drug reaction reports.
(ib) Subsequent to approval of the product, new drug shall be closely monitored for its clinical safety once it is marketed.
(ic) The applicant shall furnish Periodic Safety Update Reports (PSURs) in order to- (a) report all the relevant new information from appropriate sources;
(b) relate these data to patient exposure ;
(c) summarize the market authorization status in different countries and any significant variations related to safety; and (d) indicate whether changes should be made to product information in order to optimize the use of the product.
(ii) Ordinarily all dosage forms and formulations as well as indications for new drugs should be covered in one PSUR. Within the single PSUR separate presentations of data for different dosage forms, indications or separate population need to be given.
(iii) All relevant clinical and non-clinical safety data should cover only the period of the report (interval data). The PSURs shall be submitted every six months for the first two years after approval of the drug is granted to the applicant. For subsequent two years – the PSURs need to be submitted annually. Licensing authority may extend the total duration of submission of PSURs if it is considered necessary in the interest of public health. PSURs due for a period must be submitted within 30 calendar days of the last day of the reporting period.
However, all cases involving serious unexpected adverse reactions must be reported to the licensing authority within 15 days of initial receipt of the information by the applicant. If marketing of the new drug is delayed by the applicant after obtaining approval to market, such data will have to be provided on the deferred basis beginning from the time the new drug is marketed.
(iv) New studies specifically planned or conducted to examine a safety issue should be described in the PSURs.

(v) A PSUR should be structured as follows:

(a) A title page stating: Periodic safety update report for the product, applicant‘s name, period covered by the report, date of approval of new drug, date of marketing of new drug and date of reporting;
(b) Introduction, (c) Current worldwide market authorization status, (d) Update of actions taken for safety reasons, (e) Changes to reference safety information, (f) Estimated patient exposure, (g) Presentation of individual case histories, (h) Studies, (i) Other information, (j) Overall safety evaluation, (k) Conclusion, (l) Appendix providing material relating to indications, dosing, pharmacology and other related information.

(5) Special studies: Bioavailability / Bioequivalence Studies:

(i) For drugs approved elsewhere in the world and absorbed systemically, bioequivalence with the reference formulation should be carried out wherever applicable. These studies should be conducted under the labelled conditions of administration. Data on the extent of systemic absorption may be required for formulations other than those designed for systemic absorption.
(ii) Evaluation of the effect of food on absorption following oral administration should be carried out. Data from dissolution studies should also be submitted for all solid oral dosage forms.
(iii) Dissolution and bioavailability data submitted with the new drug application must provide information that assures bioequivalence or establishes bioavailability and dosage correlations between the formulation(s) sought to be marketed and those used for clinical trials during clinical development of the product. (See items 8.1, 8.2 and 8.3 of Appendix I).
(iv) All bioavailability and bioequivalence studies should be conducted according to the Guidelines for Bioavailability and Bioequivalence studies as prescribed.
Note.- The data requirements stated in this Schedule are expected to provide adequate information to evaluate the efficacy, safety and therapeutic rationale of new drugs (as defined under rule 122-E) prior to the permission for sale. Depending upon the nature of new drugs and disease(s), additional information may be required by the Licensing Authority. The applicant shall certify the authencity of the data and documents submitted in support of an application for new drug. The Licensing Authority reserves the right to reject any data or any document(s) if such data or contents of such documents are found to be of doubtful integrity.

APPENDIX I DATA TO BE SUBMITTED ALONG WITH THE APPLICATION TO CONDUCT CLINICAL TRIALS/IMPORT/MANUFACTURE OF NEW DRUGS FOR MARKETING IN
THE COUNTRY
1. Introduction A brief description of the drug and the therapeutic class to which it belongs.
2. Chemical and pharmaceutical information

2.1. Information on active ingredients Drug information (Generic Name, Chemical Name or INN)
2.2. Physicochemical Data (a) Chemical name and Structure Empirical formula Molecular weight (b) Physical properties Description Solubility Rotation Partition coefficient Dissociation constant
2.3. Analytical Data

Elemental analysis

Mass spectrum

NMR spectra

IR spectra

UV spectra

Polymorphic identification
2.4. Complete monograph specification including

Identification

Identity/quantification of impurities

Enantiomeric purity

Assay
2.5. Validations

Assay method

Impurity estimation method

Residual solvent/other volatile impurities (OVI) estimation method
2.6. Stability Studies (for details refer Appendix IX)

Final release specification

Reference standard characterization

Material safety data sheet
2.7. Data on Formulation Dosage form Composition Master manufacturing formula Details of the formulation (including inactive ingredients) In process quality control check Finished product specification Excipient compatibility study Validation of the analytical method Comparative evaluation with international brand(s) or approved Indian brands, if applicable Pack presentation Dissolution Assay Impurities

Content uniformity pH Force degradation study Stability evaluation in market intended pack at proposed storage conditions Packing specifications Process validation When the application is for clinical trials only, the international non-proprietary name (INN) or generic name, drug category, dosage form and data supporting stability in the intended container-closure system for the duration of the clinical trial (information covered in item nos. 2.1, 2.3, 2.6, 2.7) are required.
3. Animal Pharmacology (for details refer Appendix IV)
3.1. Summary
3.2. Specific pharmacological actions
3.3. General pharmacological actions
3.4. Follow-up and Supplemental Safety Pharmacology Studies
3.5. Pharmacokinetics: absorption, distribution; metabolism; excretion
4. Animal Toxicology (for details refer Appendix III)
4.1. General Aspects
4.2. Systemic Toxicity Studies
4.3. Male Fertility Study
4.4. Female Reproduction and Developmental Toxicity Studies
4.5. Local toxicity
4.6. Allergenicity/Hypersensitivity
4.7. Genotoxicity
4.8. Carcinogenicity 1[Note.- Where the data on animal toxicity as per the specifications of Appendix III has been submitted and the same has been considered by the regulatory authority of the country which had earlier approved the drug, the animal toxicity studies shall not be required to be conducted in India except in cases where there are specific concerns recorded in writing.]

5. Human / Clinical pharmacology (Phase I)
5.1. Summary
5.2. Specific Pharmacological effects
5.3. General Pharmacological effects
5.4. Pharmacokinetics, absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion
5.5. Pharmacodynamics / early measurement of drug activity

6. Therapeutic exploratory trials (Phase II)
6.1. Summary
6.2. Study report(s) as given in Appendix II

7. Therapeutic confirmatory trials (Phase III)
7.1. Summary
7.2. Individual study reports with listing of sites and Investigators.
8. Special studies
8.1. Summary
8.2. Bio-availability / Bio-equivalence.
8.3. Other studies e.g. geriatrics, paediatrics, pregnant or nursing women

9. Regulatory status in other countries
9.1. Countries where the drug is

a. Marketed

b. Approved

c. Approved as IND

d. Withdrawn, if any, with reasons
9.2. Restrictions on use, if any, in countries where marketed /approved
9.3. Free sale certificate or certificate of analysis, as appropriate.

10. Prescribing information
10.1. Proposed full prescribing information

11. Samples and Testing Protocol/s

11.1. Samples of pure drug substance and finished product (an equivalent of 50 clinical doses, or more number of clinical doses if prescribed by the Licensing Authority), with testing protocol/s, full impurity profile and release specifications.

1[12. New Chemical Entity and Global Clinical Trial:

12.1 Assessment of risk versus benefit to the patients
12.2 Innovation vis-à-vis existing therapeutic option
12.3 Unmet medical need in the country.] NOTES:
(1) All items may not be applicable to all drugs. For explanation, refer text of Schedule Y.
(2) For requirements of data to be submitted with application for clinical trials refer text of this Schedule.

APPENDIX IA

DATA REQUIRED TO BE SUBMITTED BY AN APPLICANT FOR GRANT OF PERMISSION TO IMPORT AND / OR MANUFACTURE A NEW DRUG ALREADY
APPROVED IN THE COUNTRY

1. Introduction A brief description of the drug and the therapeutic class

2. Chemical and pharmaceutical information

2.1. Chemical name, code name or number, if any; non-proprietary or generic name, if any, structure; physico-chemical properties
2.2. Dosage form and its composition
2.3. Test specifications (a) active ingredients (b) inactive ingredients
2.4 Tests for identification of the active ingredients and method of its assay
2.5 Outline of the method of manufacture of active ingredients
2.6 Stability data

3. Marketing information
3.1 Proposed package insert / promotional literature
3.2 Draft specimen of the label and carton
4. Special studies conducted with approval of Licensing Authority
4.1 Bioavailability / Bioequivalence and comparative dissolution studies for oral dosage forms
4.2 Sub-acute animal toxicity studies for intravenous infusions and injectables.
1[APPENDIX I B
DATA TO BE SUBMITTED ALONG WITH APPLICATION TO CONDUCT CLINICAL
TRIAL OR IMPORT OR MANUFACTURE OF A PHYTOPHARMACEUTICAL DRUG IN THE COUNTRY PART - I
1. Data to be submitted by the applicant:
1.1. A brief description or summary of the phytopharmaceutical drug giving the botanical name of the plant (including vernacular or scriptural name, wherever applicable), formulation and route of administration, dosages, therapeutic class for which it is indicated and the claims to be made for the phytopharmaceutical product.
1.2. Published literature including information on plant or product or phytopharmaceutical drug, as a traditional medicine or as an ethno medicine and provide reference to books and other documents, regarding composition, process prescribed, dose or method of usage, proportion of the active ingredients in such traditional preparations per dose or per day‘s consumption and uses.
1.3. Information on any contraindications, side effects mentioned in traditional medicine or ethno medicine literature or reports on current usage of the formulation.
1.4. Published scientific reports in respect of safety and pharmacological studies relevant for the phytopharmaceutical drug intended to be marketed,- (a) where the process and usages are similar or same to the product known in traditional medicine or ethno medicine; and (b) where process or usage is different from that known in traditional medicine or ethno medicine.
1.5. Information on any contraindications, side effects mentioned or reported in any of the studies, information on side effects and adverse reactions reported during current usage of the phytopharmaceutical in the last three years, wherever applicable.
1.6. Present usage of the phytopharmaceutical drug, – to establish history of usages, provide details of the product, manufacturer, quantum sold, extent of exposure on human population and number of years for which the product is being sold.
2. Human or clinical pharmacology information:
2.1. Published scientific reports in respect of pharmacological studies including human studies or clinical studies or epidemiological studies, relevant for the phytopharmaceutical drug intended to be marketed,- (a) where the process and usages are similar or same to the product known in traditional medicine or ethno medicine; and (b) where process or usage is different from that known in traditional medicine or ethno medicine.
2.2. Pharmacodynamic information (if available).
2.3. Monographs, if any, published on the plant or product or extract or phytopharmaceutical.
(Copies of all publications, along with english translation to be attached.)

PART – II Data generated by applicant
3. Identification, authentication and source of plant used for extraction and fractionation:
3.1. Taxonomical identity of the plant used as a source of the phytopharmaceutical drug giving botanical name of genus, species and family, followed by the authority citation (taxonomist‘s name who named the species), the variety or the cultivar (if any) needs to be mentioned.
3.2 Morphological and anatomical description giving diagnostic features and a photograph of the plant or plant part for further confirmation of identity and authenticity. (Furnish certificate of confirmation of botanical identity by a qualified taxonomist).
3.3 Natural habitat and geographical distribution of the plant and also mention whether the part of the plant used is renewable or destructive and the source whether cultivated or wild.
3.4 Season or time of collection.
3.5 Source of the plant including its geographical location and season or time of collection.
3.6 A statement indicating whether the species is any of the following, namely:- (a) determined to be endangered or threatened under the Endangered Species Act or the Convention on International Trade in Endangered species (CITES) of wild Fauna and Flora;
(b) entitled to special protection under the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 (18 of 2003); (c) any known genotypic, chemotypic and ecotypic variability of species.
3.7. A list of grower or supplier (including names and addresses) and information on the following items for each grower or supplier, if available or identified already, including information of primary processing, namely:- (a) harvest location;
(b) growth conditions;
(c) stage of plant growth at harvest;
(d) harvesting time;
(e) collection, washing, drying and storage conditions;
(f) handling, garbling and transportation;
(g) grinding, pulverising of the plant material; and (h) sieving for getting uniform particle size of powdered plant material.
3.8. Quality specifications, namely:- (a) foreign matter;
(b) total ash;
(c) acid insoluble ash;
(d) pesticide residue;
(e) heavy metal contamination;
(f) microbial load;
(g) chromatographic finger print profile with phytochemical reference marker;
(h) assay for bio-active or phytochemical compounds; and (i) chromatographic fingerprint of a sample as per test method given under quality control of the phytopharmaceutical drug (photo documentation).

3.9 . An undertaking to supply specimen sample of plant duly labeled and photocopy of the certificate of identity confirmation issued by a qualified taxonomist along with drawings or photographs of the diagnostic morphological and histological features of the botanical raw material used for the confirmation of authenticity.
4. Process for extraction and subsequent fractionation and purification:
4.1. Quality specifications and test methods for starting material.
4.2. Steps involved in processing.
(a) details of solvent used, extractive values, solvent residue tests or limits, physico-chemical tests, microbial loads, heavy metal contaminants, chromatographic finger print profile with phytochemical reference markers, assay for active constituents or characteristic markers, if active constituents are not known;
(b) characterisation of final purified fraction;
(c) data on bio-active constituent of final purified fraction;
(d) information on any excipients or diluents or stabiliser or preservative used, if any.
4.3. Details of packaging of the purified and characterised final product, storage conditions and labeling.
5. Formulation of phytopharmaceutical drug applied for:
5.1. Details of the composition, proportion of the final purified fraction with defined markers of phytopharmaceutical drug per unit dose, name and proportions of all excipients, stabilisers and any other agent used and packaging materials.
5.2. Test for identification for the phytopharmaceutical drug.
5.3. Quality specifications for active and inactive phytopharmaceutical chromatographic finger print profile with phytochemical reference marker and assay of active constituent or characteristic chemical marker.
6. Manufacturing process of formulation:
6.1. The outline of the method of manufacture of the dosage form, along with environmental controls, in-process quality control tests and limits for acceptance.
6.2. Details of all packaging materials used, packing steps and description of the final packs.
6.3. Finished product‘s quality specifications, including tests specific for the dosage form, quality and chromatographic finger print profile with phytochemical reference marker and assay for active constituent or characteristic marker, if active constituents are not known.
7. Stability data:
7.1. Stability data of the phytopharmaceutical drug described at 4 above, stored at room temperature at 40 +/- 2 deg. C and humidity at 75%RH +/- 5%RH for 0, 1, 2, 3 and 6 months.
7.2 Stability data of the phytopharmaceutical drug in dosage form or formulation stored at room temperature at 40 +/- 2 deg. C and humidity at 75%RH +/- 5%RH for 0, 1, 2, 3 and 6 months, in the pack intended for marketing.
8. Safety and pharmacological information:
8.1. Data on safety and pharmacological studies to be provided.
8.2. Animal toxicity and safety data:
(a) 28 to 90 days repeat dose oral toxicity on two species of animals;
(b) In-vitro genotoxicity data (Ame‘s test and Chromosomal aberration test as per Schedule Y);

(c) dermal toxicity tests for topical use products;
(d) teratogenicity study (only if phytopharmaceutical drug is intended for use during pregnancy).
9. Human studies:
9.1. Clinical trials for phytopharmaceutical drugs to be conducted as per applicable rules and guidelines for new drugs.
9.2. For all phytopharmaceutical drugs data from phase I (to determine maximum tolerated dose and associated toxicities) and the protocols shall be submitted prior to performing the studies.
9.3. Data of results of dose finding studies performed and the protocols shall be submitted prior to performing the studies: Provided that in the case of phytopharmaceutical drug already marketed for more than five years or where there is adequate published evidence regarding the safety of the phytopharmaceutical drug, the studies may be abbreviated, modified or relaxed.
10. Confirmatory clinical trials:
10.1. Submit protocols for approval for any specific or special safety and efficacy study proposed specific to the phytopharmaceutical drug.
10.2. Submit proposed protocol for approval for human clinical studies appropriate to generate or validate safety and efficacy data for the phytopharmaceutical dosage form or product as per applicable rules and guidelines.
10.3. Submit information on how the quality of the formulation would be maintained during the above studies.
11. Regulatory status:
11.1. Status of the phytopharmaceutical drug marketed in any country under any category like functional food or dietary supplement or as traditional medicine or as an approved drug.
12. Marketing information:
12.1. Details of package insert or patient information sheet of the phytopharmaceutical drug to be marketed.
12.2. Draft of the text for label and carton.
13. Post marketing surveillance (PMS):
13.1. The applicant shall furnish periodic safety update reports every six months for the first two years after approval the drug is granted.
13.2. For subsequent two years the periodic safety update reports need to be submitted annually.
14. Any other relevant information:
Any other relevant information which the applicant considers that it will help in scientific evaluation of the application.]
APPENDIX II

STRUCTURE, CONTENTS AND FORMAT FOR CLINICAL STUDY REPORTS
1. Title Page:

This page should contain information about the title of the study, the protocol code, name of the investigational product tested, development Phase, indication studied, a brief description of the trial design, the start and end date of patient accrual and the names of the Sponsor and the participating Institutes (Investigators).

2. Study Synopsis (1 to 2 pages):

A brief overview of the study from the protocol development to the trial closure should be given here. This section will only summarize the important conclusions derived from the study.

3. Statement of compliance with the ̳Guidelines for Clinical Trials on Pharmaceutical Products in India :
GCP Guidelines‘ issued by the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health, Government of India.
4. List of Abbreviations and Definitions

5. Table of contents
6. Ethics Committee:
This section should document that the study was conducted in accordance with the ethical principles of Declaration of Helsinki. A detailed description of the Ethics Committee constitution and date(s) of approvals of trial documents for each of the participating sites should be provided. A declaration should state that EC notifications as per Good Clinical Practice Guidelines issued by Central Drugs Standard Control Organization and Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research on Human Subjects, issued by Indian Council of Medical Research have been followed.

7. Study Team:
Briefly describe the administrative structure of the study (Investigators, site staff, Sponsor/ designates, Central laboratory etc).

8. Introduction:
A brief description of the product development rationale should be given here.

9. Study Objective:
A statement describing the overall purpose of the study and the primary and secondary objectives to be achieved should be mentioned here.

10. Investigational Plan:
This section should describe the overall trial design, the Subject selection criteria, the treatment procedures, blinding / randomization techniques if any, allowed/ disallowed concomitant treatment, the efficacy and safety criteria assessed, the data quality assurance procedures and the statistical methods planned for the analysis of the data obtained.

11. Trial Subjects:
A clear accounting of all trial Subjects who entered the study will be given here. Mention should also be made of all cases that were dropouts or protocol deviations. Enumerate the patients screened, randomised, and prematurely discontinued. State reasons for premature discontinuation of therapy in each applicable case.

12. Efficacy evaluation The results of evaluation of all the efficacy variables will be described in this section with appropriate tabular and graphical representation. A brief description of the demographic characteristics of the trial patients should also be provided along with a listing of patients and observations excluded from efficacy analysis.
13. Safety Evaluation:
This section should include the complete list
13.1 All serious adverse events, whether expected or unexpected and
13.2 unexpected advese events whether serious or not (compiled from data received as per Appendix XI).

The comparison of adverse events across study groups may be presented in a tabular or graphical form. This section should also give a brief narrative of all important events considered related to the investigational product.

14. Discussion and overall Conclusion:
Discussion of the important conclusions derived from the trial and scope for further development.
15. List of References:
16. Appendices:
List of Appendices to the Clinical Trial Report (a) Protocol and amendments (b) Specimen of Case Record Form (c) Investigators‘ name(s) with contact addresses, phone, e-mail etc. (d) Patient data listings (e) List of trial participants treated with investigational product (f) Discontinued participants (g) Protocol deviations (h) CRFs of cases involving death and life threatening adverse event cases (i) Publications from the trial (j) Important publications referenced in the study (k) Audit certificate, if available (l) Investigator‘s certificate that he/she has read the report and that the report accurately describes the conduct and the results of the study.

APPENDIX III ANIMAL TOXICOLOGY (NON-CLINICAL TOXICITY STUDIES)
1. General Principles:
Toxicity studies should comply with the norms of Good Laboratory Practice (GLP). Briefly, these studies should be performed by suitably trained and qualified staff employing properly calibrated and standardized equipment of adequate size and capacity. Studies should be done as per written protocols with modifications (if any) verifiable retrospectively. Standard operating procedures (SOPs) should be followed for all managerial and laboratory tasks related to these studies. Test substances and test systems (in-vitro or in-vivo) should be properly characterized and standardized. All documents belonging to each study, including its approved protocol, raw data, draft report, final report, and histology slides and paraffin tissue blocks should be preserved for a minimum of 5 years after marketing of the drug.
Toxicokinetic studies (generation of pharmacokinetic data either as an integral component of the conduct of non-clinical toxicity studies or in specially designed studies) should be conducted to assess the systemic exposure achieved in animals and its relationship to dose level and the time course of the toxicity study. Other objectives of toxicokinetic studies include obtaining data to relate the exposure achieved in toxicity studies to toxicological findings and contribute to the assessment of the relevance of these findings to clinical safety, to support the choice of species and treatment regimen in nonclinical toxicity studies and to provide information which, in conjunction with the toxicity findings, contributes to the design of subsequent non-clinical toxicity studies.
1.1 Systemic Toxicity Studies
1.1.1 Single-dose Toxicity Studies: These studies (see Appendix I item 4.2) should be carried out in 2 rodent species (mice and rats) using the same route as intended for humans. In addition, unless the intended route of administration in humans is only intravenous, at least one more

route should be used in one of the species to ensure systemic absorption of the drug. This route should depend on the nature of the drug. A limit of 2g/kg (or 10 times the normal dose that is intended in humans, whichever is higher) is recommended for oral dosing.
Animals should be observed for 14 days after the drug administration, and minimum lethal dose (MLD) and maximum tolerated dose (MTD) should be established. If possible, the target organ of toxicity should also be determined. Mortality should be observed for up to 7 days after parenteral administration and up to 14 days after oral administration. Symptoms, signs and mode of death should be reported, with appropriate macroscopic and microscopic findings where necessary. LD10 and LD50 should be reported preferably with 95 percent confidence limits. If LD50s cannot be determined, reasons for the same should be stated.

The dose causing severe toxic manifestations or death should be defined in the case of cytotoxic anticancer agents, and the post-dosing observation period should be up to 14 days.
Mice should first be used for determination of MTD. Findings should then be confirmed in rat for establishing linear relationship between toxicity and body surface area. In case of nonlinearity, data of the more sensitive species should be used to determine the Phase I starting dose. Where rodents are known to be poor predictors of human toxicity (e.g., antifolates), or where the cytotoxic drug acts by a novel mechanism of action, MTD should be established in non-rodent species.

1.1.2 Repeated-dose Systemic Toxicity Studies: These studies (see Appendix I, item 4.2) should be carried out in at least two mammalian species, of which one should be a non- rodent. Dose ranging studies should precede the 14-, 28-, 90- or 180- day toxicity studies. Duration of the final systematic toxicity study will depend on the duration, therapeutic indication and scale of the proposed clinical trial (see item 1.8). If a species is known to metabolize the drug in the same way as humans, it should be preferred for toxicity studies.
In repeated-dose toxicity studies the drug should be administered 7 days a week by the route intended for clinical use. The number of animals required for these studies, i.e. the minimum number of animals on which data should be available, is shown in Item 1.9.

Wherever applicable, a control group of animals given the vehicle alone should be included, and three other groups should be given graded doses of the drug. The highest dose should produce observable toxicity; the lowest dose should not cause observable toxicity, but should be comparable to the intended therapeutic dose in humans or a multiple of it . To make allowance for the sensitivity of the species the intermediate dose should cause some symptoms, but not gross toxicity or death, and should be placed logarithmically between the other two doses.
The parameters to be monitored and recorded in long-term toxicity studies should include behavioral, physiological, biochemical and microscopic observations. In case of parenteral drug administration, the sites of injection should be subjected to gross and microscopic examination. Initial and final electrocardiogram and fundus examination should be carried out in the non-rodent species.
In the case of cytotoxic anticancer agents dosing and study design should be in accordance with the proposed clinical schedule in terms of days of exposure and number of cycles. Two rodent species may be tested for initiating Phase I trials. A non-rodent species should be added if the drug has a novel mechanism of action, or if permission for Phase II, III or marketing is being sought.

For most compounds, it is expected that single dose tissue distribution studies with sufficient sensitivity and specificity will provide an adequate assessment of tissue distribution and the potential for accumulation. Thus, repeated dose tissue distribution studies should not be required uniformly for all compounds and should only be conducted when appropriate data cannot be derived from other sources. Repeated dose studies may be appropriate under certain circumstances based on the data from single dose tissue distribution studies, toxicity and toxicokinetic studies. The studies may be most appropriate for compounds which have an apparently long half life, incomplete elimination or unanticipated organ toxicity.
Notes:

(i) Single Dose Toxicity Study: Each group should contain at least 5 animals of either sex. At least four graded doses should be given. Animals should be exposed to the test substance in a single bolus or by continuous infusion or several doses within 24 hours. Animals should be observed for 14 days. Signs of intoxication, effect on body weight, gross pathological changes should be reported.
It is desirable to include histo-pathology of grossly affected organs, if any.
(ii) Dose-ranging Study: Objectives of this study include the identification of target organ of toxicity and establishment of MTD for subsequent studies.
(a) Rodents: Study should be performed in one rodent species (preferably rat) by the proposed clinical route of administration. At least four graded doses including control should be given, and each dose group as well as the vehicle control should consist of a minimum of 5 animals of each sex. Animals should be exposed to the test substance daily for 10 consecutive days. Highest dose should be the maximum tolerated dose of single-dose study. Animals should be observed daily for signs of intoxication (general appearance, activity and behaviour etc), and periodically for the body weight and laboratory parameters. Gross examination of viscera and microscopic examination of affected organs should be done.

(b) Non-rodents: One male and one female are to be taken for ascending Phase MTD study.
Dosing should start after initial recording of cage-side and laboratory parameters.
Starting dose may be 3 to 5 times the extrapolated effective dose or MTD (whichever is less), and dose escalation in suitable steps should be done every third day after drawing the samples for laboratory parameters. Dose should be lowered appropriately when clinical or laboratory evidence of toxicity are observed. Administration of test substance should then continue for 10 days at the well-tolerated dose level following which, samples for laboratory parameters should be taken. Sacrifice, autopsy and microscopic examination of affected tissues should be performed as in the case of rodents.
(iii) 14-28 Day repeated-dose toxicity studies: One rodent (6-10/sex/group) and one nonrodent (2-3/sex/group) species are needed. Daily dosing by proposed clinical route at three dose levels should be done with highest dose having observable toxicity, mid- dose between high and low dose, and low dose. The doses should preferably be multiples of the effective dose and free from toxicity. Observation parameters should include cageside observations, body weight changes, food/water intake, blood biochemistry, haematology, and gross and microscopic studies of all viscera and tissues.

(iv) 90-Day repeated-dose toxicity studies: One rodent (15-30/sex/group) and one nonrodent (4-6/sex/group) species are needed. Daily dosing by proposed clinical route at three graded dose levels should be done. In addition to the control a ―high-dose-reversal‖

group and its control group should be also included. Parameters should include signs of intoxication (general appearance, activity and behaviour etc), body weight, food intake, blood biochemical parameters, haematological values, urine analysis, organ weights, gross and microscopic study of viscera and tissues. Half the animals in ―reversal‖ groups (treated and control) should be sacrificed after 14 days of stopping the treatment. The remaining animals should be sacrificed after 28 days of stopping the treatment or after the recovery of signs and/or clinical pathological changes – whichever comes later, and evaluated for the parameters used for the main study.

(v) 180-Day repeated-dose toxicity studies: One rodent (15-30/sex/group) and one nonrodent (4-6/sex/group) species are needed. At least 4 groups, including control, should be taken. Daily dosing by proposed clinical route at three graded dose levels should be done. Parameters should include signs of intoxication, body weight, food intake, blood biochemistry, hematology, urine analysis, organ weights, gross and microscopic examination of organs and tissues.

1.2 Male Fertility Study

One rodent species (preferably rat) should be used. Dose selection should be done from the results of the previous 14 or 28-day toxicity study in rat. Three dose groups, the highest one showing minimal toxicity in systemic studies, and a control group should be taken. Each group should consist of 6 adult male animals. Animals should be treated with the test substance by the intended route of clinical use for minimum 28 days and maximum 70 days before they are paired with female animals of proven fertility in a ratio of 1:2 for mating.
Drug treatment of the male animals should continue during pairing. Pairing should be continued till the detection of vaginal plug or 10 days, whichever is earlier. Females getting thus pregnant should be examined for their fertility index after day 13 of gestation.
All the male animals should be sacrificed at the end of the study. Weights of each testis and epididymis should be separately recorded. Sperms from one epididymis should be examined for their motility and morphology. The other epididymis and both testes should be examined for their histology.
1.3 Female Reproduction and Developmental Toxicity Studies

These studies (see Appendix I, item 4.4) need to be carried out for all drugs proposed to be studied or used in women of child bearing age. Segment I, II and III studies (see below) are to be performed in albino mice or rats, and segment II study should include albino rabbits also as a second test species.
On the occasion, when the test article is not compatible with the rabbit (e.g. antibiotics which are effective against gram positive, anaerobic organisms and protozoas) the Segment II data in the mouse may be substituted.
1.3.1 Female Fertility Study (Segment I): The study should be done in one rodent species (rat preferred). The drug should be administered to both males and females, beginning a sufficient number of days (28 days in males and 14 days in females) before mating. Drug treatment should continue during mating and, subsequently, during the gestation period.
Three graded doses should be used, the highest dose (usually the MTD obtained from previous systemic toxicity studies) should not affect general health of the parent animals. At least 15 males and 15 females should be used per dose group. Control and the treated groups should be of similar size. The route of administration should be the same as intended for therapeutic use

Dams should be allowed to litter and their medication should be continued till the weaning of pups. Observations on body weight, food intake, clinical signs of intoxication, mating behaviour, progress of gestation/ parturition periods, length of gestation, parturition, post-partum health and gross pathology (and histopathology of affected organs) of dams should be recorded. The pups from both treated and control groups should be observed for general signs of intoxication, sex-wise distribution in different treatment groups, body weight, growth parameters, survival, gross examination, and autopsy. Histopathology of affected organs should be done.

1.3.2 Teratogenicity Study (Segment II):
One rodent (preferably rat) and one non-rodent (rabbit) species are to be used. The drug should be administered throughout the period of organogenesis, using three dose levels as described for segment I. The highest dose should cause minimum maternal toxicity and the lowest one should be proportional to the proposed dose for clinical use in humans or a multiple of it. The route of administration should be the same as intended for human therapeutic use.
The control and the treated groups should consist of at least 20 pregnant rats (or mice) and 12 rabbits, on each dose level. All foetuses should be subjected to gross examination, one of the foetuses should be examined for skeletal abnormalities and the other half for visceral abnormalities. Observation parameters should include: (Dams) signs of intoxication, effect on body weight, effect on food intake, examination of uterus, ovaries and uterine contents, number of corpora lutea, implantation sites, resorptions (if any); and for the foetuses, the total number, gender, body length, weight and gross/ visceral/ skeletal abnormalities, if any.

1.3.3 Perinatal Study (Segment III):
This study is specially recommended if the drug is to be given to pregnant or nursing mothers for long periods or where there are indications of possible adverse effects on foetal development. One rodent species (preferably rat) is needed. Dosing at levels comparable to multiples of human dose should be done by the intended clinical route. At least 4 groups (including control), each consisting of 15 dams should be used. The drug should be administered throughout the last trimester of pregnancy (from day 15 of gestation) and then the dose that causes low foetal loss should be continued throughout lactation and weaning. Dams should then be sacrificed and examined as described below.
One male and one female from each litter of F1 generation (total 15 males and 15 females in each group) should be selected at weaning and treated with vehicle or test substance (at the dose levels described above) throughout their periods of growth to sexual maturity, pairing, gestation, parturition and lactation. Mating performance and fertility of F1 generation should thus be evaluated to obtain the F2 generation whose growth parameters should be monitored till weaning. The criteria of evaluation should be the same as described earlier (3.4.1).

Animals should be sacrificed at the end of the study and the observation parameters should include (Dams) body weight, food intake, general signs of intoxication, progress of gestation/ parturition periods and gross pathology (if any); and for pups, the clinical signs,

sex-wise distribution in dose groups, body weight, growth parameters, gross examination, survival and autopsy (if needed) and where necessary, histopathology.

1.4 Local toxicity These studies (see Appendix I, item 4.5) are required when the new drug is proposed to be used by some special route (other than oral) in humans. The drug should be applied to an appropriate site (e.g., skin or vaginal mucous membrane) to determine local effects in a suitable species. Typical study designs for these studies should include three dose levels and untreated and/ or vehicle control, preferably use of 2 species, and increasing group size with increase in duration of treatment. Where dosing is restricted due to anatomical or humane reasons, or the drug concentration cannot be increased beyond a certain level due to the problems of solubility, pH or tonicity, a clear statement to this effect should be given. If the drug is absorbed from the site of application, appropriate systemic toxicity studies will also be required.

Notes:
(i) Dermal toxicity study: The study should be done in rabbit and rat. Daily topical (dermal) application of test substance in its clinical dosage form should be done. Test material should be applied on shaved skin covering not less than 10% of the total body surface area. Porous gauze dressing should be used to hold liquid material in place.
Formulations with different concentrations (at least 3) of test substance, several fold higher than the clinical dosage form should be used. Period of application may vary from 7 to 90 days depending on the clinical duration of use. Where skin irritation is grossly visible in the initial studies, a recovery group should be included in the subsequent repeated-dose study. Local signs (erythema, oedema and eschar formation) as well as histological examination of sites of application should be used for evaluation of results.
(ii) Photo-allergy or dermal photo-toxicity: It should be tested by Armstrong/ Harber Test in guinea pig. This test should be done if the drug or a metabolite is related to an agent causing photosensitivity or the nature of action suggests such a potential (e.g., drugs to be used in treatment of leucoderma). Pretest in 8 animals should screen 4 concentrations (patch application for 2 hours ±15 min.) with and without UV exposure (10 J/cm2). Observations recorded at 24 and 48 hours should be used to ascertain highest nonirritant dose. Main test should be performed with 10 test animals and 5 controls.
Induction with the dose selected from pretest should use 0.3 ml/patch for 2 hour ±15 min.
followed by 10 J/cm2 of UV exposure. This should be repeated on day 0, 2,4,7,9 and 11 of the test. Animals should be challenged with the same concentration of test substance between day 20 to 24 of the test with a similar 2-hour application followed by exposure to 10 J/cm2 of UV light. Examination and grading of erythema and oedema formation at the challenge sites should be done 24 and 48 hours after the challenge. A positive control like musk ambrett or psoralin should be used.

(iii) Vaginal Toxicity Test: Study is to be done in rabbit or dog. Test substance should be applied topically (vaginal mucosa) in the form of pessary, cream or ointment. Six to ten animals per dose group should be taken. Higher concentrations or several daily applications of test substance should be done to achieve multiples of daily human dose.
The minimum duration of drug treatment is 7 days (more according to clinical use), subject to a maximum of 30 days. Observation parameters should include swelling, closure of introitus and histopathology of vaginal wall.

(iv) Rectal Tolerance Test: For all preparations meant for rectal administration this test may be performed in rabbits or dogs. Six to ten animals per dose group should be taken.
Formulation in volume comparable to human dose (or the maximum possible volume) should be applied once or several times daily, per rectally, to achieve administration of multiples of daily human dose. The minimum duration of application is 7 days (more according to clinical use), subject to a maximum of 30 days. Size of suppositories may be smaller, but the drug content should be several fold higher than the proposed human dose.
Observation parameters should include clinical signs (sliding on backside), signs of pain, blood and/or mucus in faeces, condition of anal region/sphincter, gross and (if required) histological examination of rectal mucosa.
(v) Parenteral Drugs: For products meant for intravenous or intramuscular or subcutaneous or intradermal injection the sites of injection in systemic toxicity studies should be specially examined grossly and microscopically. If needed, reversibility of adverse effects may be determined on a case to case basis.
(vi) Ocular toxicity studies (for products meant for ocular instillation): These studies should be carried out in two species, one of which should be the albino rabbit which has a sufficiently large conjunctival sac. Direct delivery of drug onto the cornea in case of animals having small conjunctival sacs should be ensured. Liquids, ointments, gels or soft contact lenses (saturated with drug) should be used. Initial single dose application should be done to decide the exposure concentrations for repeated-dose studies and the need to include a recovery group. Duration of the final study will depend on the proposed length of human exposure subject to a maximum of 90 days. At least two different concentrations exceeding the human dose should be used for demonstrating the margin of safety. In acute studies, one eye should be used for drug administration and the other kept as control. A separate control group should be included in repeated-dose studies.

Slit-lamp examination should be done to detect the changes in cornea, iris and aqueous humor. Fluorescent dyes (sodium fluorescein, 0.25 to 1.0%) should be used for detecting the defects in surface epithelium of cornea and conjunctiva. Changes in intra-ocular tension should be monitored by a tonometer. Histological examination of eyes should be done at the end of the study after fixation in Davidson‘s or Zenker‘s fluid.
(vii) Inhalation toxicity studies: The studies are to be undertaken in one rodent and one non-rodent species using the formulation that is to be eventually proposed to be marketed.
Acute, subacute and chronic toxicity studies should be performed according to the intended duration of human exposure. Standard systemic toxicity study designs (described above) should be used. Gases and vapours should be given in whole body exposure chambers;
aerosols are to be given by nose-only method. Exposure time and concentrations of test substance (limit dose of 5mg/l) should be adjusted to ensure exposure at levels comparable to multiples of intended human exposure. Three dose groups and a control (plus vehicle control, if needed) are required. Duration of exposure may vary subject to a maximum of 6 hours per day and five days a week. Food and water should be withdrawn during the period of exposure to test substance.

Temperature, humidity and flow rate of exposure chamber should be recorded and reported.
Evidence of exposure with test substance of particle size of 4 micron (especially for aerosols) with not less that 25% being 1 micron should be provided. Effects on respiratory rate, findings of bronchial lavage fluid examination, histological examination of

respiratory passages and lung tissue should be included along with the regular parameters of systemic toxicity studies or assessment of margin of safety.

1.5 Allergenicity/ Hypersensitivity:

Standard tests include guinea pig maximization test (GPMT) and local lymph node assay (LLNA) in mouse. Any one of the two may be done.
Notes:
(i) Guinea Pig Maximization Test: The test is to be performed in two steps; first, determination of maximum nonirritant and minimum irritant doses, and second, the main test. The initial study will also have two components. To determine the intradermal induction dose, 4 dose levels should be tested by the same route in a batch of 4 male and 4 female animals (2 of each sex should be given Freund‘s adjuvant). The minimum irritant dose should be used for induction. Similarly, a topical minimum irritant dose should be determined for challenge. This should be established in 2 males and 2 females. A minimum of 6 male and 6 female animals per group should be used in the main study.
One test and one control group should be used. It is preferable to have one more positive control group. Intradermal induction (day 1) coupled with topical challenge (day 21) should be done. If there is no response, re-challenge should be done 7-30 days after the primary challenge. Erythema and oedema (individual animal scores as well as maximization grading) should be used as evaluation criteria.

(ii) Local Lymph Node Assay: Mice used in this test should be of the same sex, either only males or only females. Drug treatment is to be given on ear skin. Three graded doses, the highest being maximum nonirritant dose plus vehicle control should be used. A minimum of 6 mice per group should be used. Test material should be applied on ear skin on three consecutive days and on day 5, the draining auricular lymph nodes should be dissected out 5 hours after i.v. H-thymidine or bromo-deoxy-uridine (BrdU). Increase in Hthymidine or BrdU incorporation should be used as the criterion for evaluation of results.
1.6 Genotoxicity Genotoxic compounds, in the absence of other data, shall be presumed to be trans- species carcinogens, implying a hazard to humans. Such compounds need not be subjected to long-term carcinogenicity studies. However, if such a drug is intended to be administered for chronic illnesses or otherwise over a long period of time - a chronic toxicity study (up to one year) may be necessary to detect early tumorigenic effects.

Genotoxicity tests are in vitro and in vivo tests conducted to detect compounds which induce genetic damage directly or indirectly. These tests should enable a hazard identification with respect to damage to DNA and its fixation.
The following standard test battery is generally expected to be conducted:
(i) A test for gene mutation in bacteria.
(ii) An in vitro test with cytogenetic evaluation of chromosomal damage with mammalian cells or an in vitro mouse lymphoma tic assay.
(iii) An in vivo test for chromosomal damage using rodent haematopoietic cells. Other genotoxicity tests e.g. tests for measurement of DNA adducts, DNA strand breaks, DNA repair or recombination serve as options in addition to the standard battery for further investigation of genotoxicity test results obtained in the standard battery. Only under extreme conditions in which one or more tests comprising the standard battery cannot

be employed for technical reasons, alternative validated tests can serve as substitutes provided sufficient scientific justification should be provided to support the argument that a given standard battery test is not appropriate.
Both in-vitro and in-vivo studies should be done. In-vitro studies should include Ames‘ Salmonella assay and chromosomal aberrations (CA) in cultured cells. In-vivo studies should include micronucleus assay (MNA) or CA in rodent bone marrow. Data analysis of CA should include analysis of ̳gaps.‘ Cytotoxic anticancer agents: Genotoxicity data are not required before Phase I and II trials. But these studies should be completed before applying for Phase III trials.
Notes:
Ames‘ Test (Reverse mutation assay in Salmonella): S. typhimurium tester strains such as TA98, TA100, TA102, TA1535, TA97 or Escherichia coli WP2 uvrA or Escherichia coli WP2 uvrA (pKM101) should be used.
(i) In-vitro exposure (with and without metabolic activation, S9 mix) should be done at a minimum of 5 log dose levels. ―Solvent‖ and ―positive‖ control should be used. Positive control may include 9-amino-acridine, 2-nitrofluorine, sodium azide and mitomycin C, respectively, in the tester strains mentioned above. Each set should consist of at least three replicates. A 2.5 fold (or more) increase in number of revertants in comparison to spontaneous revertants would be considered positive.
(ii) In-vitro cytogenetic assay : The desired level of toxicity for in vitro cytogenetic tests using cell lines should be greater than 50% reduction in cell number or culture confluency.
For lymphocyte cultures, an inhibition of mitotic index by greater than 50% is considered sufficient. It should be performed in CHO cells or on human lymphocyte in culture. In-vitro exposure (with and without metabolic activation, S9 mix) should be done using a minimum of 3 log doses. ―Solvent‖ and ―positive‖ control should be included. A positive control like Cyclophosphamide with metabolic activation and Mitomycin C for without metabolic activation should be used to give a reproducible and detectable increase clastogenic effect over the background which demonstrates the sensitivity of the test system. Each set should consist of at least three replicates. Increased number of aberrations in metaphase chromosomes should be used as the criteria for evaluation.
(iii) In-vivo micronucleus assay: One rodent species (preferably mouse) is needed. Route of administration of test substance should be the same as intended for humans. Five animals per sex per dose groups should be used. At least three dose levels, plus ―solvent‖ and ―positive‖ control should be tested. A positive control like mitomycin C or cyclophosphamide should be used. Dosing should be done on day 1 and 2 of study followed by sacrifice of animals 6 hours after the last injection. Bone marrow from both the femora should be taken out, flushed with fetal bovine serum (20 min.), pelletted and smeared on glass slides. Giemsa-MayGruenwald staining should be done and increased number of micronuclei in polychromatic erythrocytes (minimum 1000) should be used as the evaluation criteria.
(iv) In-vivo cytogenetic assay: One rodent species (preferably rat) is to be used. Route of administration of test substance should be the same as intended for humans. Five animals/sex/dose groups should be used. At least three dose levels, plus ―solvent‖ and ―positive‖ control should be tested. Positive control may include cyclophosphamide.
Dosing should be done on day 1 followed by intra-peritoneal colchicine administration at 22 hours. Animals should be sacrificed 2 hours after colchicine administration. Bone marrow from both the femora should be taken out, flushed with hypotonic saline (20 min.),

pelletted and resuspended in Carnoy‘s fluid. Once again the cells should be pelletted and dropped on clean glass slides with a Pasteur pipette. Giemsa staining should be done and increased number of aberrations in metaphase chromosomes (minimum 100) should be used as the evaluation criteria.

1.7 Carcinogenicity (see Appendix I, item 4.8) Carcinogenicity studies should be performed for all drugs that are expected to be clinically used for more than 6 months as well as for drugs used frequently in an intermittent manner in the treatment of chronic or recurrent conditions. Carcinogenicity studies are also to be performed for drugs if there is concern about their carcinogenic potential emanating from previous demonstration of carcinogenic potential in the product class that is considered relevant to humans or where structure-activity relationship suggests carcinogenic risk or when there is evidence of preneoplastic lesions in repeated dose toxicity studies or when long-term tissue retention of parent compound or metabolite(s) results in local tissue reactions or other pathophysiological responses. For pharmaceuticals developed to treat certain serious diseases, Licensing Authority may allow carcinogenicity testing to be conducted after marketing permission has been granted.
In instances where the life-expectancy in the indicated population is short (i.e., less than 2-3 years)- no long-term carcinogenicity studies may be required. In cases where the therapeutic agent for cancer is generally successful and life is significantly prolonged there may be later concerns regarding secondary cancers. When such drugs are intended for adjuvant therapy in tumour free patients or for prolonged use in non-cancer indications, carcinogenicity studies may be / are needed. Completed rodent carcinogenicity studies are not needed in advance of the conduct of large scale clinical trials, unless there is special concern for the patient population.

Carcinogenicity studies should be done in a rodent species (preferably rat). Mouse may be employed only with proper scientific justification. The selected strain of animals should not have a very high or very low incidence of spontaneous tumors.

At least three dose levels should be used. The highest dose should be sub-lethal, and it should not reduce the life span of animals by more than 10% of expected normal. The lowest dose should be comparable to the intended human therapeutic dose or a multiple of it, e.g.
2.5x; to make allowance for the sensitivity of the species. The intermediate dose to be placed logarithmically between the other two doses. An untreated control and (if indicated) a vehicle control group should be included. The drug should be administered 7 days a week for a fraction of the life span comparable to the fraction of human life span over which the drug is likely to be used therapeutically. Generally, the period of dosing should be 24 months for rats and 18 months for mice.

Observations should include macroscopic changes observed at autopsy and detailed histopathology of organs and tissues. Additional tests for carcinogenicity (short-term bioassays, neonatal mouse assay or tests employing transgenic animals) may also be done depending on their applicability on a case to case basis.
Note:
Each dose group and concurrent control group not intended to be sacrificed early should contain atleast 50 animals of each sex. A high dose sattelite group for evaluation of pathology other than neoplasia should contain 20 animals of each sex while the sattelite control group should contain 10 animals of each sex. Observation parameters should include signs of intoxication, effect on body weight, food intake, clinical chemistry parameters, hematology parameters, urine analysis, organ weights, gross pathology and detailed histopathology. Comprehensive descriptions of benign and

malignant tumour development, time of their detection, site, dimensions, histological typing etc.
should be given.

1.8 Animal toxicity requirements for clinical trials and marketing of a new drug.

Systemic Toxicity Studies Route of administration Duration of proposed human administration Human Phase(s) for which study is proposed to be conducted Long term toxicity requirements 1[Oral or Parenteral or Transdermal Single dose or several doses in one day, Upto 1wk I,II,III 2sp,2wks > 1 wk but upto 2wks I,II,III 2sp;4wks Upto 2 wks Marketing permission 2sp;4wks > 2 wk but upto 4wks I,II,III 2 sp; equal to duration of human exposure Marketing permission 2 sp; 12 wks > 4 wks but upto 12 wks I,II,III 2 sp; equal to duration of human exposure Marketing permission 2sp;24wks > 12 wks but upto 24 wks I,II,III 2 sp; equal to duration of human exposure Marketing permission 2 sp; Rodent 24 wks, non-rodent 36 wks > 24 wks I,II,III 2 sp; Rodent 24 wks, non-rodent 36 wks Marketing permission 2 sp; Rodent 24 wks, non-rodent 36 wks] Inhalation (general anaesthetics, aerosols) Upto 2 wk I,II,III

2sp;1mo;
(Exposure time 3h/d, 5d/wk) Upto 4wk I,II,III 2sp;12wk, (Exposure time 6h/d, 5d/wk) > 1 4wk I,II,III 2sp;24wk, (Exposure time 6h/d, 5d/wk) Local Toxicity Studies Dermal Upto 2 wk I,II, 1sp;4wk III 2sp;4wk > 2 wk I,II,III 2sp;12wk Ocular or Otic or Nasal Upto 2 wk I,II 1sp;4wk III 2sp;4wk > 2 wk I,II,III 2sp;12wk Vaginal or Rectal Upto 2 wk I,II 1sp;4wk III 2sp;4wk > 2 wk I,II,III 2sp;12wk

Special Toxicity Studies Male Fertility Study:

1[ Phase III in male volunteers/patients]

Female Reproduction and Developmental Toxicity Studies:

Segment II studies in 2 species; Phase II, III involving female patients of child- bearing age.

Segment I study; Phase III involving female patients of child-bearing age.

Segment III study; Phase III for drugs to be given to pregnant or nursing mothers for long periods or where there are indications of possible adverse effects on foetal development.

Allergenicity/Hypersensitivity: Phase I, II, III - when there is a cause of concern or for parenteral drugs (including derrmal application).
Photo-allergy or dermal photo-toxicity:
Phase I, II, III - if the drug or a metabolite is related to an agent causing photosensitivity or the nature of action suggests such a potential.

Genotoxicity:
In-vitro studies - Phase I Both in-vitro and in-vivo - Phase II, III

Arcinogenicity:
Phase III - when there is a cause for concern, or when the drug is to be used for more than 6 months.

Abbreviations: sp-species; mo-month; wk-week; d -day; h-hour; I, II, III - Phases of clinical trial;

Note:

1. Animal toxicity data generated in other countries may be accepted and may not be asked to be repeated/duplicated in India on a case to case basis depending upon the quality of data and the credentials of the laboratory(ies) where such data has been generated.
2. Requirements for fixed dose combinations are given in Appendix VI.
1.9 Number of animals required for repeated-dose toxicity studies

14-28 days 84-182 days

Group Rodent (Rat) Non-rodent

(Dog or

Rodent (Rat) Non-rodent

(Dog or Monkey) Monkey)

M F M F M F M F

Control 6-10

6-10 2-3 2-3 15-30

15-30

4-6 4-6

Low dose 6-10

6-10 2-3 2-3 15-30

15-30

4-6 4-6

Intermediate 6-10

6-10 2-3 2-3 15-30

15-30

4-6 4-6 dose

High dose 6-10

6-10 2-3 2-3 15-30

15-30

4-6 4-6

2.0 Laboratory parameters to be included in toxicity studies.

Haematological parameters

• Haemoglobin • Total RBC Count

• Haematocrit • Reticulocyte Count

• Total WBC Count • Differential WBC Count

• Platelet Count

• Terminal Bone Marrow Examination

• ESR (Nonrodents only)
• General Blood Picture: A special mention of abnormal and immature cells should be made.

• Coagulation Parameters (Non-rodents only): Bleeding Time, Coagulation Time, Prothrombin Time,

Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time

Urinalysis Parameters:

• Colour • Appearance • Specific

• 24-hour urinary Gravity output

• Reaction (pH) • Albumin •Sugar • Acetone

Bile pigments Urobilinogen • Occult Blood

• Microscopic examination of urinary sediment.

Blood Biochemical Parameters

• Glucose • Cholesterol • Triglycerides

• HDL Cholesterol (Nonrodents only)

• LDL Cholesterol (Non-rodents

• Bilirubin • SGPT (ALT)

• SGOT (AST) only)

• Alkaline

• GGT • Blood Urea

• Ceatinine Phosphatase (Non-rodents only) (ALP)

• Total Proteins • Albumin Nitrogen

• Globulin • (Calculated Sodium values)

• • • Potassium Phosphorus Calcium

Gross and Microscopic Pathology

• Brain*:
Cerebrum, cerebellum,
• (Spinal Cord) • Eye • (Middle Ear) Midbrain

• Thyroid • Parathyroid) • Spleen • Thymus

• Adrenal* • (Pancreas) • (Trachea) • Lung*

• Heart* • Aorta • Oesophagus • Stomach

• Duodenum • Jejunum •

Terminal

• Colon ileum

• (Rectum) • Liver* • Kidney* • Urinary bladder

• Epididymis • Testis* • Ovary • Uterus*

• Skin •

Mammary •

Mesenteric

• Skeletal muscle gland lymph node

* Organs marked with an asterisk should be weighed.

() Organs listed in parenthesis should be examined if indicated by the nature of the drug or observed effects.

Non-clinical toxicity testing and safety evaluation data of an IND needed for the conduct of different phases of clinical trials.

Note: Refer Appendix III (Points 1.1 through 1.7 and tables 1.8 and 1.9) for essential features of study designs of the non-clinical toxicity studies listed below.
For Phase I Clinical Trials Systemic Toxicity studies (i) Single dose toxicity studies (ii) Dose Ranging Studies (iii) Repeat-dose systemic toxicity studies of appropriate duration to support the duration of proposed human exposure.
Male fertility study In-vitro genotoxicity tests Relevant local toxicity studies with proposed route of clinical application (duration depending on proposed length of clinical exposure) Allergenicity/Hypersensitivity tests (when there is a cause for concern or for parenteral drugs, including dermal application) Photo-allergy or dermal photo-toxicity test (if the drug or a metabolite is related to an agent causing photosensitivity or the nature of action suggests such a potential) For Phase II Clinical Trials Provide a summary of all the non-clinical safety data (listed above) already submitted while obtaining the permissions for Phase I trial, with appropriate references.
In case of an application for directly starting a Phase II trial - complete details of the non- clinical safety data needed for obtaining the permission for Phase I trial, as per the list provided above must be submitted.
Repeat-dose systemic toxicity studies of appropriate duration to support the duration of proposed human exposure In-vivo genotoxicity testsSegment II reproductive/developmental toxicity study (if female patients of child bearing age are going to be involved)

For Phase III Clinical Trials Provide a summary of all the non-clinical safety data (listed above) already submitted while obtaining the permissions for Phase I and II trials, with appropriate references.
In case of an application for directly initiating a Phase III trial - complete details of the non-clinical safety data needed for obtaining the permissions for Phase I and II trials, as per the list provided above must be provided.
Repeat-dose systemic toxicity studies of appropriate duration to support the duration of proposed human exposure Reproductive/developmental toxicity studies Segment I (if female patients of child bearing age are going to be involved), and Segment III (for drugs to be given to pregnant or nursing mothers or where there are indications of possible adverse effects on foetal development).
Carcinogenicity studies (when there is a cause for concern or when the drug is to be used for more than 6 months).

For Phase IV Clinical Trials Provide a summary of all the non-clinical safety data (listed above) already submitted while obtaining the permissions for Phase I, II and III trials, with appropriate references.
In case an application is made for initiating the Phase IV trial, complete details of the non-clinical safety data needed for obtaining the permissions for Phase I, II and III trials, as per the list provided above must be submitted.

Application Of Good Laboratory Practices (GLP) The animal studies be conducted in an accredited laboratory. Where the safety pharmacology studies are part of toxicology studies, these studies should also be conducted in an accredited laboratory.

1. General Principles
APPENDIX IV ANIMAL PHARMACOLOGY Specific and general pharmacological studies should be conducted to support use of therapeutics in humans. In the early stages of drug development enough information may not be available to rationally select study design for safety assessment. In such a situation, a general approach to safety pharmacology studies can be applied. Safety pharmacology studies are studies that investigate potential undesirable pharmacodynamic effects of a substance on physiological functions in relation to exposure within the therapeutic range or above.

1.1 Specific Pharmacological Actions Specific pharmacological actions are those which demonstrate the therapeutic potential for humans.
The specific studies that should be conducted and their design will be different based on the individual properties and intended uses of investigational drug. Scientifically validated methods should be used. The use of new technologies and methodologies in accordance with sound scientific principles should be preferred.

1.2 General Pharmacological Actions
1.2.1 Essential Safety Pharmacology Safety pharmacology studies need to be conducted to investigate the potential undesirable pharmacodynamic effects of a substance on physiological functions in relation to exposure within the therapeutic range and above. These studies should be designed to identify undesirable pharmacodynamic properties of a substance that may have relevance to its human safety; to evaluate adverse pharmacodynamic and/or pathophysiological effects observed in toxicology and/or clinical studies; and to investigate the mechanism of the adverse pharmacodynamic effects observed and/or suspected.
The aim of the essential safety pharmacology is to study the effects of the test drug on vital functions. Vital organ systems such as cardiovascular, respiratory and central nervous systems should be studied. Essential safety pharmacology studies may be excluded or supplemented based on scientific rationale. Also, the exclusion of certain

test(s) or exploration(s) of certain organs, systems or functions should be scientifically justified.

1.2.1.1 Cardiovascular System

Effects of the investigational drug should be studied on blood pressure, heart rate, and the electrocardiogram. If possible in vitro, in vivo and/or ex vivo methods including electrophysiology should also be considered.

1.2.1.2 Central Nervous System

Effects of the investigational drug should be studied on motor activity, behavioral changes, coordination, sensory and motor reflex responses and body temperature.
1.2.1.3 Respiratory System

Effects of the investigational drug on respiratory rate and other functions such as tidal volume and hemoglobin oxygen saturation should be studied.
1.3 Follow-up and Supplemental Safety Pharmacology Studies In addition to the essential safety pharmacological studies, additional supplemental and follow-up safety pharmacology studies may need to be conducted as appropriate. These depend on the pharmacological properties or chemical class of the test substance, and the data generated from safety pharmacology studies, clinical trials, pharmacovigilance, experimental in vitro or in vivo studies, or from literature reports.
1.3.1 Follow-up Studies For Essential Safety Pharmacology Follow-up studies provide additional information or a better understanding than that provided by the essential safety pharmacology.
1.3.1.1 Cardiovascular System These include ventricular contractility, vascular resistance and the effects of chemical mediators, their agonists and antagonists on the cardiovascular system.
1.3.1.2 Central Nervous System

These include behavioral studies , learning and memory, electrophysiology studies , neurochemistry and ligand binding studies.
1.3.1.3 Respiratory System

These include airway resistance, compliance, pulmonary arterial pressure, blood gases and blood pH.
1.3.2 Supplemental Safety Pharmacology Studies

These studies are required to investigate the possible adverse pharmacological effects that are not assessed in the essential safety pharmacological studies and are a cause for concern.

1.3.2.1 Urinary System

These include urine volume, specific gravity, osmolality, pH, proteins, cytology and blood urea nitrogen, creatinine and plasma proteins estimation.
1.3.2.2 Autonomic Nervous System

These include binding to receptors relevant for the autonomic nervous system, and functional response to agonist or antagonist responses in vivo or in vitro, and effects of direct stimulation of autonomic nerves and their effects on cardiovascular responses.

1.3.2.3 Gastrointestinal System These include studies on gastric secretion, gastric pH measurement, gastric mucosal examination, bile secretion, gastric emptying time in vivo and ileocaecal contraction in vitro.

1.3.2.4 Other Organ Systems Effects of the investigational drug on organ systems not investigated elsewhere should be assessed when there is a cause for concern. For example dependency potential, skeletal muscle, immune and endocrine functions may be investigated.
1.4 Conditions Under Which Safety Pharmacology Studies Are Not Necessary Safety pharmacology studies are usually not required for locally applied agents e.g.
dermal or ocular, in cases when the pharmacology of the investigational drug is well known, and/or when systemic absorption from the site of application is low. Safety pharmacology testing is also not necessary, in the case of a new derivative having similar pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics.

1.5 Timing Of Safety Pharmacology Studies In Relation To Clinical Development
1.5.1 Prior To First Administration In Humans The effects of an investigational drug on the vital functions listed in the essential safety pharmacology should be studied prior to first administration in humans. Any follow-up or supplemental studies identified, should be conducted if necessary, based on a cause for concern.

1.5.2 During Clinical Development Additional investigations may be warranted to clarify observed or suspected adverse effects in animals and humans during clinical development
1.5.3 Before applying for marketing Approval Follow-up and supplemental safety pharmacology studies should be assessed prior to approval unless not required, in which case this should be justified. Available information from toxicology studies addressing safety pharmacology endpoints or information from clinical studies can replace such studies.

1.6 Application Of Good Laboratory Practices (GLP) The animal studies be conducted in an accredited laboratory. Where the safety pharmacology studies are part of toxicology studies, these studies should also be conducted in an accredited laboratory.

APPENDIX V
INFORMED CONSENT
1. Checklist for study Subject‘s informed consent documents
1.1 Essential Elements:
1. Statement that the study involves research and explanation of the purpose of the research
2. Expected duration of the Subject's participation.
3. Description of the procedures to be followed, including all invasive procedures and
4. Description of any reasonably foreseeable risks or discomforts to the Subject
5. Description of any benefits to the Subject or others reasonably expected from research. If no benefit is expected Subject should be made aware of this.
6. Disclosure of specific appropriate alternative procedures or therapies available to the Subject.
7. Statement describing the extent to which confidentiality of records identifying the Subject will be maintained and who will have access to Subject‘s medical records
8. Trial treatment schedule(s) and the probability for random assignment to each treatment (for randomized trials) 1[Statement describing the financial compensation and medical management as under:
2[(a) In case of any injury occurring to the subject during the clinical trial, free medical management shall be given as long as required or till such time it is established that the injury is not related to the clinical trial, whichever is earlier.] (b) In the event of a trial related injury or death, the Sponsor or his representative, whosoever has obtained permission from the Licensing Authority for conduct of the clinical trial, shall provide financial compensation for the injury or death].
10. An explanation about whom to contact for trial related queries, rights of Subjects and in the event of any injury
11. The anticipated prorated payment, if any, to the Subject for participating in the trial
12. Subject's responsibilities on participation in the trial
13. Statement that participation is voluntary, that the subject can withdraw from the study at any time and that refusal to participate will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits to which the Subject is otherwise entitled.
3[14. Statement that there is a possibility of failure of investigational product to provide intended therapeutic effect.
15. Statement that in the case of placebo controlled trial, the placebo administered to the subjects shall not have any therapeutic effect.
16.Any other pertinent information.]

1.2 Additional elements, which may be required

(a) Statement of foreseeable circumstances under which the Subject's participation may be terminated by the Investigator without the Subject's consent.
(b) Additional costs to the Subject that may result from participation in the study.
(c) The consequences of a Subject‘s decision to withdraw from the research and procedures for orderly termination of participation by Subject.
(d) Statement that the Subject or Subject's representative will be notified in a timely manner if significant new findings develop during the course of the research which may affect the Subject's willingness to continue participation will be provided.
(e) A statement that the particular treatment or procedure may involve risks to the Subject (or to the embryo or fetus, if the Subject is or may become pregnant), which are currently unforeseeable (f) Approximate number of Subjects enrolled in the study.

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 53(E), dt. 30-01-2013. 3. G.S.R. 611(E), dt. 31-7-2015.

2. Format of informed consent form for Subjects participating in a clinical trial Informed Consent form to participate in a clinical trial Study Title:
Study Number:
Subject‘s Initials:
Subject‘s Name:
Date of Birth / Age:
1[Address of the Subject Qualification Occupation: Student/Self-Employed/ Service/Housewife/Others (Please tick as appropriate) Annual Income of the subject Name and address of the nominee(s) and his relation to the subject (for the purpose of compensation in case of trial related death).] Please initial box (Subject)

(i) I confirm that I have read and understood the information sheet dated [ ] for the above study and have had the opportunity to ask questions.
(ii) I understand that my participation in the study is voluntary and that I am [ ] free to withdraw at any time, without giving any reason, without my medical care or legal rights being affected.
(iii) I understand that the Sponsor of the clinical trial, others working on the [ ] Sponsor‘s behalf, the Ethics Committee and the regulatory authorities will not need my permission to look at my health records both in respect of the current study and any further research that may be conducted in relation to it, even if I withdraw from the trial. I agree to this access.
However, I understand that my identity will not be revealed in any information released to third parties or published.
(iv) I agree not to restrict the use of any data or results that arise from this [ ] study provided such a use is only for scientific purpose(s)

(v) I agree to take part in the above study. [ ]

Signature (or Thumb impression) of the Subject/Legally Acceptable Representative:

Date: / _/

Signatory‘s Name:

Signature of the Investigator:
Date:Study Investigator‘s Name:

Signature of the Witness

Date: / / Name of the Witness:

1[Copy of the Patient Information Sheet and duly filled Informed Consent Form shall be handled over to the subject or his/her attendant.]

1. Ins. by G.S.R 53(E), dt. 30-01-2013

APPENDIX VI FIXED DOSE COMBINATIONS (FDCs)

Fixed Dose Combinations refer to products containing one or more active ingredients used for a particular indication(s). FDCs can be divided into the following groups and data required for approval for marketing is described below:

(a) The first group of FDCs includes those in which one or more of the active ingredients is a new drug. For such FDCs to be approved for marketing data to be submitted will be similar to data required for any new drug (including clinical trials) [see rule 122E, item (a)].

(b)(i) The second group FDCs includes those in which active ingredients already approved/marketed individually are combined for the first time, for a particular claim and where the ingredients are likely to have significant interaction of a pharmacodynamic or pharmacokinetic nature [see rule 122E, item (c)]. If clinical trials have been carried out with the FDC in other countries, reports of such trials should be submitted. If the FDC is marketed abroad, the regulatory status in other countries should be stated. (see Appendix I, item 9).

(ii) For marketing permission, appropriate chemical and pharmaceutical data will be submitted.
In case such a combination is not marketed anywhere in the world but these drugs are already in use concomitantly (not as an FDC but individually) for the said claim, marketing permission may be granted based on chemical and pharmaceutical data. Data showing the stability of the proposed dosage form will also have to be submitted.

(iii) For any other such FDCs, clinical trials may be required. For obtaining permission to carry out clinical trials with such FDCs a summary of available pharmacological, toxicological and clinical data on the individual ingredients should be submitted, along with the rationale for combining them in the proposed ratio. In addition, acute toxicity data (LD 50) and pharmacological data should be submitted on the individual ingredients as well as their combination in the proposed ratio.

(c) The third group of FDCs includes those which are already marketed, but in which it is proposed either to change the ratio of active ingredients or to make a new therapeutic claim. For such FDCs, the appropriate rationale including published reports (if any) should be submitted to obtain marketing permission. Permission will be granted depending upon the nature of the claim and data submitted.

(d) The fourth group of FDC includes those whose individual active ingredients (or drugs from the same class) have been widely used in a particular indication(s) for years, their concomitant use is often necessary and no claim is proposed to be made other than convenience. It will have to be demonstrated that the proposed dosage form is stable and the ingredients are unlikely to have significant interaction of a pharmacodynamic or pharmacokinetic nature.
No additional animal or human data are generally required for these FDCs, and marketing permission may be granted if the FDC has an acceptable rationale.

APPENDIX VII
UNDERTAKING BY THE INVESTIGATOR
1. Full name, address and title of the Principal Investigator (or Investigator(s) when there is no Principal Investigator)
2. Name and address of the medical college, hospital or other facility where the clinical trial will be conducted: Education, training & experience that qualify the Investigator for the clinical trial (Attach details including Medical Council registration number, and / or any other statement(s) of qualification(s))

3. Name and address of all clinical laboratory facilities to be used in the study.

4. Name and address of the Ethics Committee that is responsible for approval and continuing review of the study.

5. Names of the other members of the research team (Co- or sub-Investigators) who will be assisting the Investigator in the conduct of the investigation (s).
6. Protocol Title and Study number (if any) of the clinical trial to be conducted by the Investigator.

7. Commitments:

(i) I have reviewed the clinical protocol and agree that it contains all the necessary information to conduct the study. I will not begin the study until all necessary Ethics Committee and regulatory approvals have been obtained.
(ii) I agree to conduct the study in accordance with the current protocol. I will not implement any deviation from or changes of the protocol without agreement by the Sponsor and prior review and documented approval / favorable opinion from the Ethics Committee of the amendment, except where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard(s) to the trial Subjects or when the change(s) involved are only logistical or administrative in nature.
(iii) I agree to personally conduct and/or supervise the clinical trial at my site.
(iv) I agree to inform all Subjects, that the drugs are being used for investigational purposes and I will ensure that the requirements relating to obtaining informed consent and ethics committee review and approval specified in the GCP guidelines are met.
(v) I agree to report to the Sponsor all adverse experiences that occur in the course of the investigation(s) in accordance with the regulatory and GCP guidelines.

(vi) I have read and understood the information in the Investigator's brochure, including the potential risks and side effects of the drug.

(vii) I agree to ensure that all associates, colleagues and employees assisting in the conduct of the study are suitably qualified and experienced and they have been informed about their obligations in meeting their commitments in the trial.

(viii) I agree to maintain adequate and accurate records and to make those records available for audit / inspection by the Sponsor, Ethics Committee, Licensing Authority or their authorized representatives, in accordance with regulatory and GCP provisions. I will fully cooperate with any study related audit conducted by regulatory officials or authorized representatives of the Sponsor.

(ix) I agree to promptly report to the Ethics Committee all changes in the clinical trial activities and all unanticipated problems involving risks to human Subjects or others.

(x) I agree to inform all unexpected serious adverse events to the Sponsor as well as the Ethics Committee within seven days of their occurence.

(xi) I will maintain confidentiality of the identification of all participating study patients and assure security and confidentiality of study data.

(xii) I agree to comply with all other requirements, guidelines and statutory obligations as applicable to clinical Investigators participating in clinical trials

8. Signature of Investigator with Date

APPENDIX VIII ETHICS COMMITTEE 1[I. Requirements and guidelines for registration of Ethics Committee
1. Scope:
Ethics Committee shall review every clinical trial proposal and evaluate the possible risks to the subjects, expected benefits and adequacy of documentation for ensuring privacy, confidentiality and justice. In the case of any serious adverse event occurring to the clinical trial subjects during the clinical trial, the Ethics Committee shall analyze and forward its opinion as per procedures specified in APPENDIX XII of Schedule Y.

2. Composition of Ethics Committee:
(a) Ethics Committee shall consist of not less than seven members and one among its members, who is from outside the institute, shall be appointed as Chairman; one member as a Member Secretary and rest of the members shall be from Medical, Scientific, Non-medical and Non-scientific fields including lay public.
(b) The committee shall include at least one member whose primary area of interest or specialization is Non-scientific and at least one member who is independent of the institution.
Besides, there should be appropriate gender representation on the Ethics Committee.
(c) The Ethics Committee can have as its members, individuals from other Institutions or Communities, if required.
(d) Members should be conversant with the provisions of clinical trials under this Schedule, Good Clinical Practice Guidelines for clinical trials in India and other regulatory requirements to safeguard the rights, safety and well- being of the trial subjects.
(e) For review of each protocol the quorum of Ethics Committee shall be at least five members with the following representations:
(i) Basic medical scientist (preferably one pharmacologist) (ii) Clinician;
(iii) Legal expert;
(iv) Social scientist or representative of non-governmental voluntary agency or philosopher or ethicist or theologian or a similar person;
(v) Lay person from community.
(f) The members representing medical scientists and clinicians should have post graduate qualification and adequate experience in their respective fields and aware of their role and responsibilities as committee members.
(g) As far as possible, based on the requirement of research area such as HIV, Genetic disorder etc., specific patient group may also be represented in the Ethics Committee.
(h) There should be no conflict of interest. The members shall voluntarily withdraw from the Ethics Committee meeting while making a decision on an application which evokes a conflict of interest which may be indicated in writing to the Chairman prior to the review and be recorded so in the minutes. All members shall sign a declaration on conflict of interest.
(i) Subject experts or other experts may be invited to the meetings for their advice. But no such expert shall have voting rights.
Information required to be submitted by the applicant for registration of Ethics Committee:
(a) Name of the Ethics Committee (b) Authority under which the Ethics Committee has been constituted, membership requirements, the term of reference, conditions of appointment and the quorum required.

(c) The procedure for resignation, replacement or removal of members.
(d) Address of the office of the Ethics Committee.
(e) Name, address, qualification, organizational title, telephone number, fax number, email, mailing address and brief profile of the Chairman.
(f) Names, qualifications, organizational title, telephone number, fax number, e-mail and mailing address of the members of the Ethics Committee. The information shall also in clude member ‘s specialty (pr imary, scientific or non -scientific), member ‘s affiliation with institutions and patient group representation, if any.
(g) Details of the supporting staff.
(h) In the case of Ethics Committees existing before the publication of the Drugs and Cosmetics (Third Amendment) Rules, 2013,- (i) Type of clinical research reviewed by the committee (e.g. pharmaceuticals, devices, epidemiological, retrospective, herbals, etc.) (ii) Documents reviewed for every clinical trial protocol including Informed Consent documents.
(iii) In for mation in respect of number of meetings of the committee and documentation of the minutes of meetings of these committees concerning clinical trials.
(iv) Information regarding review of serious adverse events reported during the conduct of the trial.
(i) The Standard Operating Procedures to be followed by the committee in general.
(j) Standard Operating Procedures to be followed by the committee for vulnerable population.
(k) Policy regarding training for new and existing committee members along with Standard Operating Procedures.
(l) Policy to monitor or prevent the conflict of interest along with Standard Operating Procedures.
(m) If the committee has been audited or inspected before, give details.
4. Maintenance of record:
All documentation and communication of an Ethics Committee are to be dated, filed and preserved according to the Standard Operating Procedures. Strict confidentiality shall be maintained during access and retrieval procedures. Records should be maintained for the following, namely:- (a) The constitution and composition of the Ethics Committee; (b) The curriculum vitae of all the committee members;
(c) Standard Operating Procedures followed by the committee; (d) National and international guidelines;
(e) Copies of the protocol, data collection formats, Case Report Forms, Investigator‘s brochures, etc, submitted for review;
(f) All correspondence with committee members and Investigators regarding application, decision and follow up;
(g) Agenda of all Ethics Committee meetings;
(h) Minutes of all Ethics Committee meetings with signature of the Chairman; (i) Copies of decisions communicated to the applicants;
(j) Record of all notification issued for premature termination of a study with a summary of the reasons;
(k) Final report of the study including microfilms, compact disks or video-recordings.
All records shall be safely maintained after the completion or termination of the study for not less than five years from the date of completion or termination of the trial (Both in hard and soft copies).
5. The Ethics Committee shall be open to inspection by the officers authorized by the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, who may include an officer of the State Drug Control Authority concerned, to verify compliance to the requirements of Schedule Y, Good Clinical

Practice guidelines and other applicable regulation for safeguarding the rights, safety and well-being of the trial subjects.]

III. Format for According Approval to clinical trial protocol by the Ethics Committee.] To Dr.

Dear Dr.

The Institutional Ethics Committee / Independent Ethics Committee (state name of the committee, as appropriate) reviewed and discussed your application to conduct the clinical trial entitled ―...‖ on ...(date).

The following documents were reviewed:

(a) Trial Protocol (including protocol amendments), dated Version no (s).
(b) Patient Information Sheet and Informed Consent Form (including updates if any) in English and/or vernacular language.
(c) Investigator‘s Brochure, dated , Version no.

(d) Proposed methods for patient accrual including advertisement (s) etc. proposed to be used for the purpose.
(e) Principal Investigator‘s current CV.
(f) Insurance Policy / Compensation for participation and for serious adverse events occurring during the study participation.
(g) Investigator‘s Agreement with the Sponsor.
(h) Investigator‘s Undertaking (Appendix VII).

The following members of the ethics committee were present at the meeting held on (date, time, place).
Chairman of the Ethics Committee Member secretary of the Ethics Committee Name of each member with designation

We approve the trial to be conducted in its presented form.

The Institutional Ethics Committee / Independent Ethics Committee expects to be informed about the progress of the study, any SAE occurring in the course of the study, any changes in the protocol and patient information/informed consent and asks to be provided a copy of the final report.

Yours sincerely,

Member Secretary, Ethics Committee.

APPENDIX IX STABILITY TESTING OF NEW DRUGS Stability testing is to be performed to provide evidence on how the quality of a drug substance or formulation varies with time under the influence of various environmental factors such as temperature, humidity and light, and to establish shelf life for the formulation and recommended storage conditions.

Stability studies should include testing of those attributes of the drug substance that are susceptible to change during storage and are likely to influence quality, safety, and/or efficacy. In case of formulations the testing should cover, as appropriate, the physical, chemical, biological, and microbiological attributes, preservative content (e.g., antioxidant, antimicrobial preservative), and functionality tests (e.g., for a dose delivery system).

Validated stability-indicating analytical procedures should be applied. For long term studies, frequency of testing should be sufficient to establish the stability profile of the drug substance.

In general, a drug substance should be evaluated under storage conditions that test its thermal stability and, if applicable, its sensitivity to moisture. The storage conditions and the length of studies chosen should be sufficient to cover storage, shipment and subsequent use.

Stress testing of the drug substance should be conducted to identify the likely degradation products, which in turn establish the degradation pathways, evaluate the intrinsic stability of the molecule and validate the stability indicating power of the analytical procedures used. The nature of the stress testing will depend on the individual drug substance and the type of formulation involved.

Stress testing may generally be carried out on a single batch of the drug substance. It should include the effect of temperatures ), humidity where appropriate, oxidation, and photolysis on the drug substance.

Data should be provided for (a) Photostability on at least one primary batch of the drug substance as well as the formulation, as the case may be and (b) the susceptibility of the drug substance to hydrolysis across a wide range of pH values when in solution or suspension.

Long-term testing should cover a minimum of 12 months‘ duration on at least three primary batches of the drug substance or the formulation at the time of submission and should be continued for a period of time sufficient to cover the proposed shelf life. Accelerated testing should cover a minimum of 6 months duration at the time of submission.

In case of drug substances, the batches should be manufactured to a minimum of pilot scale by the same synthetic route and using a method of manufacture that simulates the final process to be used for production batches. In case of formulations, two of the three batches should be at least pilot scale and the third one may be smaller. The manufacturing process(es) used for primary batches should simulate that to be applied to production batches and should provide products of the same quality and meeting the same specifications as that intended for marketing.

The stability studies for drug substances should be conducted either in the same container - closure system as proposed for storage and distribution or in a container - closure system that simulates the proposed final packaging. In case of formulations, the stability studies should be conducted in the final container - closure system proposed for marketing.

Stability Testing of new drug substances and formulations:

(i) Study conditions for drug substances and formulations intended to be stored under general conditions

Study Study conditions Duration of study Long term 30°C ± 2°C/65% RH ± 5% RH 12 months Accelerated 40°C ± 2°C/75% RH ± 5% RH 6 months If at any time during 6 months‘ testing under the accelerated storage condition, such changes occur that cause the product to fail in complying with the prescribed standards, additional testing under an intermediate storage condition should be conducted and evaluated against significant change criteria.

(ii) Study conditions for drug substances and formulations intended to be stored in a refrigerator

Study Study conditions Duration of study Long term 5°C ± 3°C 12 months Accelerated 25°C ± 2°C/60% RH ± 5% RH 6 months

(iii) Study conditions for drug substances and formulations intended to be stored in a freezer Study Study conditions Duration of study Long term - 20°C ± 5°C 12 months (iv) Drug substances intended for storage below -20°C shall be treated on a case-bycase basis.
(v) Stability testing of the formulation after constitution or dilution, if applicable, should be conducted to provide information for the labelling on the preparation, storage condition, and in-use period of the constituted or diluted product. This testing should be performed on the constituted or diluted product through the proposed in-use period.

APPENDIX X

CONTENTS OF THE PROPOSED PROTOCOL FOR CONDUCTING CLINICAL
TRIALS

1. Title Page (a) Full title of the clinical study, (b) Protocol / Study number, and protocol version number with date (c) The IND name/number of the investigational drug (d) Complete name and address of the Sponsor and contract research organization if any (e) List of the Investigators who are conducting the study, their respective institutional affiliations and site locations (f) Name(s) of clinical laboratories and other departments and/or facilities participating in the study.

2. Table of Contents A complete Table of Contents including a list of all Appendices.
1. Background and Introduction (a) Preclinical experience.
(b) Clinical experience.
Previous clinical work with the new drug should be reviewed here and a description of how the current protocol extends existing data should be provided. If this is an entirely new indication, how this drug was considered for this should be discussed. Relevant information regarding pharmacological, toxicological and other biological properties of the drug/biologic/medical device, and previous efficacy and safety experience should be described.

2. Study Rationale This section should describe a brief summary of the background information relevant to the study design and protocol methodology. The reasons for performing this study in the particular population included by the protocol should be provided.

3. Study Objective(s) (primary as well as secondray) and their logical relation to the study design.
4. Study Design (a) Overview of the Study Design: Including a description of the type of study (i.e., double-blind, multicentre, placebo controlled, etc.), a detail of the specific treatment groups and number of study Subjects in each group and investigative site, Subject number assignment, and the type, sequence and duration of study periods.
(b) Flow chart of the study (c) A brief description of the methods and procedures to be used during the study.
(d) Discussion of Study Design: This discussion details the rationale for the design chosen for this study.
5. Study Population: the number of Subjects required to be enrolled in the study at the investigative site and by all sites along with a brief description of the nature of the Subject population required is also mentioned.

6. Subject Eligibility (a) Inclusion Criteria (b) Exclusion Criteria
7. Study Assessments – plan, procedures and methods to be described in detail
8. Study Conduct stating the types of study activities that would be included in this section would be: medical history, type of physical examination, blood or urine testing, electrocardiogram (ECG), diagnostic testing such as pulmonary function tests, symptom measurement, dispensation and retrieval of medication, Subject cohort assignment, adverse event review, etc.
Each visit should be described separately as Visit 1, Visit 2, etc.

Discontinued Subjects: Describes the circumstances for Subject withdrawal, dropouts, or other reasons for discontinuation of Subjects . State how dropouts would be managed and if they would be replaced, describe the method of handling of protocol waivers, if any. The person(s) who approves all such waivers should be identified and the criteria used for specific waivers should be provided.
Describes how protocol violations will be treated, including conditions where the study will be terminated for non-compliance with the protocol.
9. Study Treatment

(a) Dosing schedule (dose, frequency, and duration of the experimental treatment) Describe the administration of placebos and/or dummy medications if they are part of the treatment plan. If applicable, concomitant drug(s), their doses, frequency, and duration of concomitant treatment should be stated.
(b) Study drug supplies and administration: A statement about who is going to provide the study medication and that the investigational drug formulation has been manufactured following all regulations Details of the product stability, storage requirements and dispensing requirements should be provided.
(c) Dose modification for study drug toxicity: Rules for changing the dose or stopping the study drug should be provided.
(d) Possible drug interactions.
(e) Concomitant therapy: The drugs that are permitted during the study and the conditions under which they may be used are detailed here. Describe the drugs that a Subject is not allowed to use during

parts of or the entire study. If any washout periods for prohibited medications are needed prior to enrolment, these should be described here.
(f) Blinding procedures: A detailed description of the blinding procedure if the study employs a blind on the Investigator and/or the Subject.
(g) Unblinding procedures: If the study is blinded, the circumstances in which unblinding may be done and the mechanism to be used for unblinding should be given.

10. Adverse Events (See Appendix XI): Description of expected adverse events should be given.
Procedures used to evaluate an adverse event should be described.
11. Ethical Considerations: Give the summary of:
(a) Risk/benefit assessment:
(b) Ethics Committee review and communications.
(c) Informed consent process.
(d) Statement of Subject confidentiality including ownership of data and coding procedures.
12. Study Monitoring and Supervision: A description of study monitoring policies and procedures should be provided along with the proposed frequency of site monitoring visits, and who is expected to perform monitoring.
Case Record Form (CRF) completion requirements, including who gets which copies of the forms and any specifics required in filling out the forms CRF correction requirements, including who is authorized to make corrections on the CRF and how queries about study data are handled and how errors, if any, are to be corrected should be stated.
Investigator study files, including what needs to be stored following study completion should be described.
13. Investigational Product Management

(a) Give Investigational product description and packaging (stating all Ingredients and the formulation of the investigational drug and any placebos used in the study) (b) The precise dosing required during the study.
(c) Method of packaging, labelling, and blinding of study substances.
(d) Method of assigning treatments to Subjects and the Subject identification code numbering system.
(e) Storage conditions for study substances.
(f) Investigational product accountability: Describe instructions for the receipt, storage, dispensation, and return of the investigational products to ensure a complete accounting of all investigational products received, dispensed, and returned/destroyed.
(g.) Describe policy and procedure for handling unused investigational products.
14. Data Analysis:

Provide details of the statistical approach to be followed including sample size, how the sample size was determined, including assumptions made in making this determination, efficacy endpoints (primary as well as secondary) and safety endpoints.
Statistical analysis: Give complete details of how the results will be analyzed and reported along with the description of statistical tests to be used to analyze the primary and secondary endpoints defined above. Describe the level of significance, statistical tests to be used, and the methods used for missing data; method of evaluation of the data for treatment failures, non-compliance, and Subject withdrawals; rationale and conditions for any interim analysis if planned.
Describe statistical considerations for Pharmacokinetic (PK) analysis, if applicable.
15. Undertaking by the Investigator (see Appendix VII).

16. Appendices: Provide a study synopsis, copies of the informed consent documents (patient information sheet, informed consent form etc.); CRF and other data collection forms; a summary of relevant pre-clinical safety information and any other documents referenced in the clinical protocol.

APPENDIX XI Data Elements for reporting serious adverse events occuring in a clinical trial

Patient Details Initials & other relevant identifier (hospital/OPD record number etc.)* Gender Age and/or date of birth Weight Height Suspected Drug(s) Generic name of the drug*.
Indication(s) for which suspect drug was prescribed or tested. Dosage form and strength.
Daily dose and regimen (specify units - e.g., mg, ml, mg/kg).
Route of administration.
Starting date and time of day.
Stopping date and time, or duration of treatment Other Treatment(s) Provide the same information for concomitant drugs (including non prescription/OTC drugs) and non-drug therapies, as for the suspected drug(s).
Details of Suspected Adverse Drug Reaction(s) Full description of reaction(s) including body site and severity, as well as the criterion (or criteria) for regarding the report as serious. In addition to a description of the reported signs and symptoms, whenever possible, describe a specific diagnosis for the reaction.* Start date (and time) of onset of reaction.
Stop date (and time) or duration of reaction.
Dechallenge and rechallenge information.
Setting (e.g., hospital, out-patient clinic, home, nursing home).
Outcome Information on recovery and any sequelae; results of specific tests and/or treatment that may have been conducted.
For a fatal outcome, cause of death and a comment on its possible relationship to the suspected reaction; any post-mortem findings.
Other information: anything relevant to facilitate assessment of the case, such as medical history including allergy, drug or alcohol abuse; family history; findings from special investigations etc.
Details about the Investigator* Name Address Telephone number Profession (speciality) Date of reporting the event to Licensing Authority:
Date of reporting the event to Ethics Committee overseeing the site:
Signature of the Investigator

Note: Information marked * must be provided.‖]

1[APPENDIX XII Compensation in case of injury or death during clinical trial

2[(1) In case of an injury occurring to the subject during the clinical trial, free medical management shall be given as long as required or till such time it is established that the injury is not related to the clinical trial, whichever is earlier.]

(2) In case the injury occurring to the trial subject is related to the clinical trial, such subject shall also be entitled for financial compensation as per order of the Licensing Authority defined under clause (b) of Rule 21 and the financial compensation will be over and above any expenses incurred on the medical management of the subject. 3[In case, there is no permanent injury, the quantum of compensation shall be commensurate with the nature of the non-permanent injury and loss of wages.] (3) In the case of clinical trial related death of the subject, his/her nominee(s) would be entitled for financial compensation as per the order of the Licensing Authority defined under clause (b) of Rule 21, and the financial compensation will be over and above any expenses incurred on the medical management of the subject.

(4) The financial compensation for clinical trial related injury or death could be in the form of:- (a) Payment for medical management;
(b) Financial compensation for trail related injury;
(c) Financial compensation to nominee(s) of the trial subject in case of death;
(d) Financial compensation for the child injured in–utero because of the participation of parent in clinical trial.

(5) The Sponsor or his representative, whosoever had obtained permission from the Licensing Authority for conduct of the clinical trial shall provide financial compensation, if the injury or death has occurred because of any or the following reasons, namely:- (a) Adverse effect of investigational product(s);
(b) Any clinical trial procedures involved in the study;
(c) Violation of the approved protocol, scientific misconduct or negligence by the Sponsor or his representative or the Investigator;
(d) Failure of investigational product to provide intended therapeutic effect; where, the standard care, though available, was not provided to the subject as per the clinical trial protocol.
(e) Use of placebo in a placebo-controlled trial, where, the standard care, though available, was not provided to the subject as per the clinical trial protocol;

(f) Adverse effects due to concomitant medication excluding standard care, necessitated as part of approved protocol;

(g) Injury to the child in-utero because of the participation of parent in clinical trial.

(6) Procedure for payment of financial compensation.

(a) The Investigator shall report all serious 1[***] adverse events to the Licensing Authority as defined under clause (b) of Rule 21, the Sponsor or his representative whosoever had obtained permission from the Licensing Authority for conduct of the clinical trial and the Ethics Committee that accorded approval to the study protocol, within twenty four hours of their occurrence as per Appendix XI. 2[In case, the Investigator fails to report any serious adverse event within the stipulated period, he shall have to furnish the reason for the delay to the satisfaction of the Licensing Authority along with the report of the serious adverse event.]

(b) (i) The cases of serious adverse events of death shall be examined as under:
(A) An independent Expert Committee shall be constituted by the Licensing Authority as defined under Rule 21(b) to examine the cases and recommend to the Licensing Authority for the purpose of arriving at the cause of death and quantum of compensation in case of clinical trial related death.
(B)The Sponsor or his representative, whosoever had obtained permission from the Licensing Authority for conducting the clinical trial and the Investigator shall forward their reports on serious adverse event of death after due analysis to 3[***] the Licensing Authority as defined under Rule 21(b) and the head of the Institution where the trial has been conducted within 4[fourteen days] of occurrence of the serious adverse event of death.
(C) The Ethics Committee shall forward its report on serious adverse event of death after due analysis along with its opinion on the financial compensation, if any, to be paid by the Sponsor or his representative, whosoever had obtained permission from the Licensing Authority as defined under Rule 21(b) for conducting the clinical trial, 5[***] to the Licensing Authority within 6[thirty days] of the occurrence of the serious adverse event of death.
2[(CA) The Licensing Authority shall forward the report of the Investigator, Sponsor or his representative whosoever had obtained permission from the Licensing Authority for conducting clinical trial and the Ethics Committee to the Chairman of the Expert Committee.]

1. The word ―and unexpected‖ omitted by G.S.R. 889(E), dt. 12.12.2014.
3. The word ―Chairman of the Expert Committee with a copy of the report to‖ omitted by G.S.R. 889(E), dt. 12.12.2014.
5. The word ―to the Chairman of the Expert Committee with a copy of the report‖ omitted by G.S.R. 889(E), dt. 12.12.2014.

(D) The Expert Committee shall examine the report of serious adverse event of death and give its recommendations to the Licensing Authority for the purpose of arriving at the cause of the adverse event with in 1[one hundred and five days of the occurrence of the adverse event,] and the expert committee while examining the event, may take into consideration, the reports of the Investigator, Sponsor or his representative whosoever had obtained permission from the Licensing Authority for conducting the clinical trial and the Ethics Committee.

(E) In the case of clinical trial related death, the Expert Committee shall also recommend the quantum of compensation to be paid by the Sponsor or his representative, whosoever had obtained permission from the Licensing Authority as defined under Rule 21(b) for conducting the clinical trial.

(F) The Licensing Authority shall consider the recommendations of the Expert Committee and shall determine the cause of death and pass orders as deemed necessary.

(G) In case of clinical trial related death, the Licensing Authority, after considering the recommendations of the Expert Committee, shall decide the quantum of compensation to be paid by the Sponsor or his representative, whosoever had obtained permission from the Licensing Authority for conducting the clinical trial and shall pass orders as deemed necessary within 1[one hundred and fifty days of the occurrence of the adverse event].

(ii) Cases of serious adverse events, other than deaths, shall be examined as under:
(A) The Sponsor or his representative, whosoever had obtained permission from the Licensing Authority for conducting the clinical trial, and the Investigator shall forward their reports on serious adverse event, after due analysis, to the Licensing Authority as defined under Rule 21(b), Chairman of the Ethics Committee and the head of the Institution where the trial has been conducted within 1[fourteen days] of occurrence of the serious adverse event.

(B) The Ethics Committee shall forward its report on the serious adverse event, after due analysis along with its opinion regarding the financial compensation, if any, to be paid by the Sponsor or his representative, whosoever had obtained permission from the Licensing Authority as defined under Rule 21(b) for conducting the clinical trial, to the Licensing Authority within 1[thirty days] of occurrence of the serious adverse event.

(C) The Licensing Authority shall determine the cause of injury and pass order as deemed necessary. The Licensing Authority shall have the option to constitute an independent Expert Committee, wherever considered necessary, to examine such serious adverse events of injury, which will recommend to the Licensing Authority for arriving at the

cause considered necessary, to examine such serious adverse events of injury, which will recommend to the Licensing Authority for arriving at the cause of the injury and also the quantum of compensation in case of clinical trial related injury, to be paid by the Sponsor or his representative whosoever had obtained permission from the Licensing Authority as defined under Rule 21(b) for conducting the clinical trial.
(D) In case of clinical trial related injury, the Licensing Authority, shall decide the quantum of compensation to be paid by the Sponsor or his representative whosoever had obtained permission from the Licensing Authority for conducting the clinical trial and shall pass orders as deemed necessary within 1[one hundred and fifty days of the occurrence of the adverse event].
(c) The sponsor or his representative, whosoever had obtained permission from the Licensing Authority for conducting the clinical trial shall pay the compensation in case of clinical trial related injury or death as per the order of the Licensing Authority as defined under Rule 21(b) within thirty days of the receipt of such order.]


================================================================================
SOURCE: Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisement) Act, 1954.pdf
================================================================================

The Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954 (ACT NO. 21 OF 1954) (As on the 15th April, 2026)

AMENDING ACT The Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Amending Act, (42 of 1963).

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS USED

Cl.,cls. .
.
.
. . for Clause, clauses.
Ins.
.
.
.
.
. ,, Inserted.
Notifn.
.
.
.
.
.
,, Notification.
S., ss.
.
.
.
.
.
,, Section, sections.
Sch.

.
.
.
.
.
,, Schedule.
Subs.

.
.
.
.
.
,, Substituted.
w.e.f.
.
.
.
.
.
,, with effect from.

THE DRUGS AND MAGIC REMEDIES (OBJECTIONABLE ADVERTISEMENTS) ACT, 1954

ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS

SECTIONS
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Prohibition of advertisement of certain drugs for treatment of certain diseases and disorders.
4. Prohibition of misleading advertisements relating to drugs.
5. Prohibition of advertisement of magic remedies for treatment of certain diseases and disorders.
6. Prohibition of import into, and export from India of certain advertisements.
7. Penalty.
8. Powers of entry, search, etc.
9. Offences by companies.
9A. Offences to be cognizable.
10. Jurisdiction to try offences.
10A. Forfeiture.
11. Officers to be deemed to be public servants.
12. Indemnity.
13. Other laws not affected.
14. Savings.
15. Power to exempt from application of Act.
16. Power to make rules.
THE SCHEDULE.

THE DRUGS AND MAGIC REMEDIES (OBJECTIONABLE ADVERTISEMENTS) ACT, 1954 ACT NO. 21 OF 19541 [30th April, 1954.] An Act to control the advertisement of drugs in certain cases, to prohibit the advertisement for certain purposes of remedies alleged to possess magic qualities and to provide for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:—
1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954.
(2) It extends to the whole of India 2***, and applies also to persons domiciled in the territories to which this Act extends who are outside the said territories.
(3) It shall come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by Notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— (a) ‘advertisement’ includes any notice, circular, label, wrapper, or other document, and any announcement made orally or by any means of producing or transmitting light, sound or smoke;
(b) ‘drug’ includes— (i) a medicine for the internal or external use of human beings or animals;
(ii) any substance intended to be used for or in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of disease in human beings or animals;
(iii) any article, other than food, intended to affect or influence in any way the structure or any organic function of the body of human beings or animals;
(iv) any article intended for use as a component of any medicine, substance or article, referred to in sub-clauses (i), (ii) and (iii);
(c) ‘magic remedy’ includes a talisman, mantra, kavacha, and any other charm of any kind which is alleged to possess miraculous powers for or in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of any disease in human beings or animals or for affecting or influencing in any way the structure or any organic function of the body of human beings or animals;
4[(cc) ‘registered medical practitioner’ means any person,— (i) who holds a qualification granted by an authority specified in, or notified under section 3 of the Indian Medical Degrees Act, 1916 (7 of 1916) or specified in the Schedules to the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956); or (ii) who is entitled to be registered as a medical practitioner under any law for the time being in force in any State to which this Act extends relating to the registration of medical practitioner;] (d) ‘taking any part in the publication of any advertisement’ includes—

1. This Act has been extended to Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 1963, sec. 3 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 1-10-1963), the State of Sikkim, vide S.O. 949 (E), dated 20th October, 1988 and extended to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch., (w.e.f. 1-8-1965).
2. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the V Sch. (w.e.f. 31-10- 2019).
3. 1st April, 1955, vide notifin. No. S.R.O. 511, dated 26th February, 1955, see Gazette of India, 1955, Part II, s. 3.
4. Ins. by Act 42 of 1963, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-12-1963).

(i) the printing of the advertisement, (ii) the publication of any advertisement outside the territories to which this Act extends by or at the instance of a person residing within the said territories;
1* * * * * *
3. Prohibition of advertisement of certain drugs for treatment of certain diseases and disorders.—Subject to the provisions of this Act, no person shall take any part in the publication of any advertisement referring to any drug in terms which suggest or are calculated to lead to the use of that drug for— (a) the procurement of miscarriage in women or prevention of conception in women; or (b) the maintenance or improvement of the capacity of human beings for sexual pleasure; or (c) the correction of menstrual disorder in women; or 2[(d) the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of any disease, disorder or condition specified in the Schedule, or any other disease, disorder or condition (by whatsoever name called) which may be specified in the rules made under this Act:
Provided that no such rule shall be made except— (i) in respect of any disease, disorder or condition which requires timely treatment in consultation with a registered medical practitioner or for which there are normally no accepted remedies; and (ii) after consultation with the Drugs Technical Advisory Board constituted under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and, if the Central Government considers necessary, with such other persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of Ayurvedic or Unani systems of medicines as that Government deems fit.]
4. Prohibition of misleading advertisements relating to drugs.—Subject to the provisions of this Act, no person shall take any part in the publication of any advertisement relating to a drug if the advertisement contains any matter which— (a) directly or indirectly gives a false impression regarding the true character of the drug; or (b) makes a false claim for the drug; or (c) is otherwise false or misleading in any material particular.
5. Prohibition of advertisement of magic remedies for treatment of certain diseases and disorders.—No person carrying on or purporting to carry on the profession of administering magic remedies shall take any part in the publication of any advertisement referring to any magic remedy which directly or indirectly claims to be efficacious for any of the purposes specified in section 3.
6. Prohibition of import into, and export from India of certain advertisements.—No person shall import into, or export from, the territories to which this Act extends any document containing an advertisement of the nature referred to in section 3 or section 4, or section 5, and any document, containing any such advertisements shall be deemed to be goods of which the import or export has been prohibited under section 19 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 (8 of 1878) and all the provisions of that Act shall have effect accordingly, except that section 183 thereof shall have effect as if for the word ‘shall’ therein the word ‘may’ were substituted.
7. Penalty.—Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act 3[or the rules made thereunder] shall, on conviction, be punishable— (a) in the case of the first conviction, with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both;

1. Cl. (e) omitted by Act 42 of 1963, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-12-1963).
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clause (d) (w.e.f. 17-12-1963).

(b) in the case of a subsequent conviction, with imprisonment which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
1[8. Powers of entry, search, etc.—(1) Subject to the provisions of any rules made in this behalf, any Gazetted Officer authorised by the State Government may, within the local limits of the area for which he is so authorised,— (a) enter and search at all reasonable times, with such assistants, if any, as he considers necessary, any place in which he has reason to believe that an offence under this Act has been or is being committed;
(b) seize any advertisement which he has reason to believe contravenes any of the provisions of this Act:
Provided that the power of seizure under this clause may be exercised in respect of any document, article or thing which contains any such advertisement, including the contents, if any, of such document, article or thing, if the advertisement cannot be separated by reason of its being embossed or otherwise, from such document, article or thing without affecting the integrity, utility or saleable value thereof;
(c) examine any record, register, document or any other material object found in any place mentioned in clause (a) and seize the same if he has reason to believe that it may furnish evidence of the commission of any offence punishable under this Act.
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898) shall, so far as may be, apply to any search or seizure under this Act as they apply to any search or seizure made under the authority of a warrant issued under section 98 of the said Code.
(3) Where any person seizes anything under clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (1), he shall, as soon as may be, inform a Magistrate and take his orders as to the custody thereof.]
9. Offences by companies.—(1) If the person contravening any of the provisions of this Act is a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company shall be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence was committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director or manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— (a) ‘company’ means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals;
and (b) ‘director’ in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.
2[9A. Offences to be cognizable.—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), an offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.]
10. Jurisdiction to try offences.—No Court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.

1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1963, s. 5, for section 8 (w.e.f. 7-12-1963).

1[10A. Forfeiture.—Where a person has been convicted by any Court for contravening any provision of this Act or any rule made thereunder, the Court may direct that any document (including all copies thereof), article or thing, in respect of which the contravention is made, including the contents thereof where such contents are seized under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 8, shall be forfeited to the Government.]
11. Officers to be deemed to be public servants.—Every person authorised under section 8 shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
12. Indemnity.—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.
13. Other laws not affected.—The provisions of this Act are in addition to, and not in derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
2[14. Savings.—Nothing in this Act shall apply to— (a) any sign board or notice displayed by a registered medical practitioner on his premises indicating that treatment for any disease, disorder or condition specified in section 3, the Schedule or the rules made under this Act, is undertaken in those premises; or (b) any treatise or book dealing with any of the matters specified in section 3 from a bona fide scientific or social standpoint; or (c) any advertisement relating to any drug sent confidentially in the manner prescribed under section 16 only to a registered medical practitioner; or (d) any advertisement relating to a drug printed or published by the Government; or (e) any advertisement relating to a drug printed or published by any person with the previous sanction of the Government granted prior to the commencement of the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Amendment Act, 1963 (42 of 1963):
Provided that the Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, withdraw the sanction after giving the person an opportunity of showing cause against such withdrawal.]
15. Power to exempt from application of Act.—If in the opinion of the Central Government public interest requires that the advertisement of any specified drug or class of drugs 3[or any specified class of advertisements relating to drugs] should be permitted, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the provisions of sections 3, 4, 5 and 6 or any one of such provisions shall not apply or shall apply subject to such conditions as may be specified in the notification to or in relation to the advertisement of any such drugs or class of drugs 3[or any such class of advertisements relating to drugs].
16. Power to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may— (a) specify any 4[disease, disorder or condition] to which the provisions of section 3 shall apply;

1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1963, s. 7 (w.e.f. 7-12-1963).
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for section 14 (w.e.f. 7-12-1963).
5. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “disease or condition” (w.e.f. 7-12-1963).

(b) prescribe the manner in which advertisements of articles or things referred to in clause (c) of 1* * * section 14 may be sent confidentially.
2[(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]

1. The words, brackets and figure “sub-section (1) of” omitted by Act 42 of 1963, s. 10 (w.e.f. 7-12-1963).

1[THE SCHEDULE [See sections 3(d) and 14]

S. No. Name of the disease, disorder or condition
1.
Appendicitis
2.
Arteriosclerosis
3.
Blindness
4.
Blood poisoning
5.
Bright’s disease
6.
Cancer
7.
Cataract
8.
Deafness
9.
Diabetes
10.
Diseases and disorders of the brain
11.
Diseases and disorders of the optical system
12.
Diseases and disorders of the uterus
13.
Disorders of menstrual flow
14.
Disorders of the nervous system
15.
Disorders of the prostatic gland
16.
Dropsy
17.
Epilepsy
18.
Female diseases (in general)
19.
Fevers (in general)
20.
Fits
21.
Form and structure of the female bust
22.
Gall stones, kidney stones and bladder stones
23.
Gangrene

1. Added by Act 42 of 1963, s. 11 (w.e.f. 7-12-1963).

S. No. Name of the disease, disorder or condition
24.
Glaucoma
25.
Goitre
26.
Heart diseases
27.
High or low blood pressure
28.
Hydrocele
29.
Hysteria
30.
Infantile paralysis
31.
Insanity
32.
Leprosy
33.
Leucoderma
34.
Lockjaw
35.
Locomotor ataxia
36.
Lupus
37.
Nervous debility
38.
Obsesity
39.
Paralysis
40.
Plague
41.
Pleurisy
42.
Pneumonia
43.
Rheumatism
44.
Ruptures
45.
Sexual impotence
46.
Smallpox
47.
Stature of persons
48.
Sterility in women
49.
Trachoma
50.
Tuberculosis
51.
Tumours

S. No. Name of the disease, disorder or condition
52.
Typhoid fever
53.
Ulcers of gastro-intestinal tract

54.

Venereal diseases, including syphilis, gonorrhoea, soft chancre, venereal granuloma and lympho granuloma.]

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS “In recent years there has been a great increase in the number of objectionable advertisements published in newspapers or magazines or otherwise relating to alleged cures for venereal diseases, sexual stimulants and alleged cures for diseases and conditions peculiar to women. These advertisements tend to cause the ignorant and the unwary to resort to self-medication with harmful drugs and appliances, or to resort to quacks who indulge in such advertisements for treatment which causes great harm. It is necessary in the public interest to put a stop to such undesirable advertisements. This Bill is intended for this purpose.
2. It is considered that the necessary legislation should be enacted by the Centre in order to deal with this menace on uniform lines. Such legislation is relatable to the Entry “Drugs and Poisons” in the Concurrent List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India in so far as undesirable advertisements relating to drugs are concerned and to the Entry “Legal, Medical and other Professions” in the same List in regard to similar advertisements of magic remedies by persons who practise the profession of administering such remedies. The Bill when enacted will supersede State laws where they exist to the extent to which they are repugnant to the Central law.”

NEW DELHI; A.KAUR.
The 12th August, 1953.


================================================================================
SOURCE: Order dated 25-07-2025 enclosing Ayurveda Aahara.pdf
================================================================================

भारतीय खा सुरा एवं मानक ािधकरण Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (वाय एवं परवार कयाण मंालय) (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare) व ान एवं मानक वभाग Science and Standards Division एफ ड$ ए भवन, कोटला रोड, नई (दली-११०००२ FDA Bhawan, Kotla Road, New Delhi - 110002 ईमेल/Email : ayurveda-aahara@fssai.gov.in

(दनांक/Dated 25 जुलाई/July 2025

आदेश Order

वषय: खा सुरा और मानक (आयुव6द आहार) विनयम, २०२२ के अंतग9त शािमल आयुव6द आहार– के संबंध म< Subject: Ayurveda Aahara covered under Food Safety and Standards (Ayurveda Aahara) Regulations, 2022 – reg

खा सुरा एवं मानक (आयुव6द आहार) विनयम, २०२२ क= अनुसूची ‘ख’ के अंतग9त (टBपण १ का संदभ9 लेते हुए, जो यह िन(द9C करता है (क खा ािधकरण समयसमय पर Eेणी 'क' म< सFGमिलत आयुव6द आहार क= सूची दे सकती है। This is in reference to the Note (1) under Schedule B of the Food Safety and Standards (Ayurveda Aahara) Regulations, 2022 which specifies that the Food Authority may provide a list of Ayurveda Aahara covered under category A from time to time.
२.
इस संबंध म<, आयुष मंालय के परामश9 से, एफएसएसएआई, खा सुरा एवं मानक (आयुव6द आहार) विनयम, २०२२ के अंतग9त Eेणी 'क' के अंतग9त आने वाले आयुव6द आहार (ित संलKन) खा Lयवसाय संचालकM (एफबीओ) क= आयुव6द आहार के उPपादन एवं सुवधा हेतु तुत कर रहा है।
2. In this regard, in consultation with Ministry of Ayush, FSSAI is hereby providing Ayurveda Aahara covered under category A under the Food Safety and Standards (Ayurveda Aahara) Regulations, 2022 (copy enclosed) for facilitating Food Business Operators (FBOs) for manufacturing of Ayurveda Aahara.
SS-T0SP05(EC)/2/2022-Standard-FSSAI I/29912/2025

३. तथा, वग9 'क' के अंतग9त आने वाले परंतु सूची म< न उFलFखत आयुव6द आहार उPपादM क= Fथित म< खा कारोबार$ उSह< सूची म< शािमल करने के िलए खा ािधकरण को अनुसूची 'क' म< सFGमिलत TंथM से आिधकारक संगत पाठ तुत करते हुए अनुरोध कर सकते है। अतः समय-समय पर होने वाले (कसी भी परवत9न क= सूचना अलग से खा ािधकरण Wारा द$ जाएगी। य(द कोई X/(टBपण हM, तो उSह< ayurvedaaahara@fssai.gov.in पर ईमेल कर<।
3. Further, in case of Ayurveda Aahara products falling under category A, but not mentioned in the list, Food Business Operator shall request the Food Authority for inclusion by submitting relevant literature from Authoritative text listed under Schedule A books. Thus, any changes happening from time to time will be notified separately. Any queries/concern may be forwarded to the email: ayurvedaaahara@fssai.gov.in.
४. यह सम ािधकार$ के अनुमोदन से िनग9त है।
4. This issues with the approval of the Competent Authority

(डॉ. अलका राव) (Dr. Alka Rao) सलाहकार (व ान एवं मानक और विनयम) Advisor (Science & Standards & Regulation) उपरो\ानुसार संलKन Encl. as above SS-T0SP05(EC)/2/2022-Standard-FSSAI I/29912/2025


================================================================================
SOURCE: patent amentdent rules till 2024.pdf
================================================================================

2040 GI/2024 (1) रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल.- 33004/99 REGD. No. D. L.-33004/99

xxxGIDHxxx xxxGIDExxx असाधारण EXTRAORDINARY भाग II—खण् ड 3—उप-खण् ड (i) PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (i) प्राजधकार से प्रकाजित
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY

वाजणज्य और उद्योग मंत्रालय (उद्योग संवधधन और आंतररक व्यापार जवभाग) अजधसूचना नई दिल्ली, 16 माचध, 2024

सा.का.जन. 215(अ).— िबदक पेटेंट जनयम, 2003 में और संिोधन करने के जलए, पेटेंट अजधजनयम, 1970 (1970 का 39) की धारा 159 की उप धारा (3) की अपेक्षा के अनुसार, कजतपय जनयमों के मसौिे को, वाजणज्य और मंत्रालय (उद्योग संवधधन और आंतररक व्यापार जवभाग) भारत सरकार की अजधसूचना संख्या सा.का.जन. 08 (अ) दिनांक 2 िनवरी, 2024 के द्वारा भारत के रािपत्र, असाधारण, भाग II, खण्ड 3, उप-खण्ड (i) में प्रकाजित दकया गया था, जिसके माध्यम से, उक्त अजधसूचना को प्रकाजित करने वाले आजधकाररक रािपत्र की प्रजतयां, आम लोगों को उपलब्ध कराए िाने की तारीख से, तीस दिनों की अवजध समाप्त होने से पूवध इससे प्रभाजवत होने वाले सभी संभाजवत व्यजक्तयों से आपजियां और सुझाव आमंजत्रत दकए गए थे;
और, िबदक, उक्त अजधसूचना को प्रकाजित दकए गए भारत के रािपत्र की प्रजतयां आम लोगों को 2 िनवरी, 2024 को उपलब्ध करा िी गईं थीं। और, िबदक, उक्त मसौिा जनयमों के संबंध में आम लोगों से प्राप्त आपजियों और सुझावों पर केंद्र सरकार द्वारा जवचार दकया गया है। अतः अब, पेटेंट अजधजनयम, 1970 (1970 का 39) की धारा 159 द्वारा प्रिि िजक्तयों का प्रयोग करते हुए, केंद्र सरकार एतद्वारा पेटेंट जनयम, 2003 में और संिोधन करने के जलए जनम्नजलजखत जनयम बनाती है, नामतः - सं. 201] नई दिल्ली, िजनवार, माचध 16, 2024/फाल् गुन 26, 1945

No. 201] NEW DELHI, SATURDAY, MARCH 16, 2024/PHALGUNA 26, 1945

सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-16032024-253150 CG-DL-E-16032024-253150

1.
(1) इन जनयमों को ‘पेटेंट (जद्वतीय संिोधन) जनयम, 2024’ कहा िाएगा।

(2) ये जनयम आजधकाररक रािपत्र में इनके प्रकािन की तारीख से प्रभावी होंगे।
2.
पेटेंट जनयम, 2003 में (इसके पश्चात इन्हें उक्त जनयम कहा िाएगा), जनयम 107 के पश्चात, जनम्नजलजखत अध्यायों को िाजमल दकया िाएगा, नामतः “अध्याय XIVक िाजस्ट्त और अपीलों का न्यायजनणधयन 107क. पररभाषाएं – इस अध्याय में, िब तक दक अन्यथा संिभध अपेजक्षत न हो, - (क) "न्यायजनणधयन अजधकारी" का आिय अजधजनयम की धारा 124क के तहत अजधकृत अजधकारी से है;
(ख) "अपीलकताध" का आिय ऐसे व्यजक्त से है िो न्यायजनणधयन अजधकारी के आिेि से असंतुष्ट है और अजधजनयम की धारा 124ख की उप-धारा (1) के तहत अपीलीय प्राजधकारी के समक्ष अपील करने को प्राथजमकता िेता है;
(ग) "अपीलीय प्राजधकारी" का आिय ऐसे प्राजधकारी अजधकारी से है जिसे अजधजनयम की धारा 124ख के उप-धारा (1) के तहत अजधकृत दकया गया हो;
(घ) इन जनयमों में प्रयुक्त उन िब्िों और अजभव्यजक्तयों, िो जनयम में पररभाजषत नहीं है परंतु अजधजनयम में पररभाजषत हैं, का वही अथध होगा िो अजधजनयम में उनके जलए जनधाधररत है। 107ख. जिकायत — (1) कोई भी व्यजक्त अजधजनयम की धारा 120, 122 और 123 के तहत दकए गए दकसी उल्लंघन के संबंध में न्यायजनणधयन अजधकारी को इलेक्ट्रॉजनक माध्यम से प्रपत्र 31 में जिकायत ििध करा सकता है। 107ग. िांच करना – (1) अजधजनयम की धारा 124क के तहत न्यायजनणधयन के प्रयोिन के जलए, दकसी व्यजक्त ने उस धारा में यथाजवजनर्िधष्ट उल्लंघन दकया है, तो न्यायजनणधयन अजधकारी ऐसे व्यजक्त को इलेक्ट्रॉजनक माध्यम से नोरटस िारी करेगा जिसमें उसे नोरटस में जवजनर्िधष्ट अवजध के भीतर (िो दक तामील की तारीख से सात दिन की अवजध से कम न हो) कारण बताना अपेजक्षत होगा दक उसके जवरुद्ध िांच क्ट्यों नहीं की िानी चाजहए। (2) उप-जनयम (1) के तहत प्रत्येक नोरटस दकए गए कजथत उल्लंघन की प्रकृजत को इंजगत करेगा। (3) ऐसे व्यजक्त द्वारा प्रस्ट्तुत दकए गए कारण, यदि कोई हो, पर जवचार करने के बाि, न्यायजनणधयन अजधकारी की राय है दक िांच की िानी चाजहए, तो वह उस व्यजक्त को नोरटस में यथाजनधाधररत तारीख को व्यजक्तगत रूप से उपजस्ट्थत होने के जलए या उसके द्वारा जवजधवत रुप से अजधकृत अपने वकील के माध्यम से उपजस्ट्थजत होने के जलए एक नोरटस िारी करेगा। (4) जनयत तारीख को, न्यायजनणधयन अजधकारी, उस व्यजक्त या उसके वकील को, जिसके जखलाफ कायधवाही िुरु की गई है, ऐसे व्यजक्त द्वारा दकए गए उल्लंघन और जिस उल्लंघन के संबंध में आरोप लगाया गया है उन अजधजनयम के प्रावधानों के बारे में स्ट्पष्ट रुप से समझाएगा। (5) तब न्यायजनणधयन अजधकारी द्वारा, उस व्यजक्त को ऐसे िस्ट्तावेि या साक्ष्य पेि करने का अवसर दिया िाएगा, जिन्हें वह िांच के जलए प्रासंजगक समझे और यदि आवश्यक हो, तो सुनवाई को दकसी आगामी तारीख तक स्ट्थजगत दकया िा सकता है और ऐसे साक्ष्य लेने में न्यायजनणधयन अजधकारी भारतीय साक्ष्य अजधजनयम 2023 (2023 का 47) के प्रावधानों का पालन करने के जलए बाध्य नहीं होगा। (6) इस जनयम के अधीन िांच करते समय न्यायजनणधयन अजधकारी, मामले के तथ्यों और पररजस्ट्थजतयों से पररजचत दकसी भी ऐसे व्यजक्त को साक्ष्य िेने या कोई िस्ट्तावेि प्रस्ट्तुत करने के जलए, िो न्यायजनणधयन अजधकारी की राय में िांच की जवषय-वस्ट्तु के जलए उपयोगी या संगत हो सकता है, उस व्यजक्त की उपजस्ट्थत की अपेक्षा कर सकता है और उसके पास उस व्यजक्त को बुलाने का अजधकार होगा।

(7) यदि कोई व्यजक्त उप जनयम (3) द्वारा यथा अपेजक्षत रूप में न्यायजनणधयन अजधकारी के समक्ष उपजस्ट्थत होने में जवफल रहता है, उपेक्षा करता है या उपजस्ट्थत होने से मना करता है, तो न्यायजनणधयन अजधकारी ऐसे व्यजक्त की अनुपजस्ट्थजत में, ऐसा करने के कारणों को ििध करने के बाि, िांच को आगे बढा सकता है। (8) यदि, न्यायजनणधयन अजधकारी के समक्ष प्रस्ट्तुत दकए गए साक्ष्य पर जवचार करने पर, न्यायजनणधयन अजधकारी संतुष्ट हो िाता है दक व्यजक्त ने उल्लंघन दकया है, तो वह, जलजखत आिेि द्वारा, अजधजनयम के अनुसार, ऐसी िाजस्ट्त लगा सकता है िो वह उजचत समझता है। (9) उप-जनयम (8) के तहत दकए गए प्रत्येक आिेि में अजधजनयम के उन प्रावधानों को जनर्िधष्ट दकया िाएगा, जिनके संबंध में उल्लंघन दकया गया है और उसमें िाजस्ट्त लगाने के कारणों को िाजमल दकया िाएगा। (10) उप-जनयम (8) के तहत दकए गए प्रत्येक आिेि पर तारीख अंदकत होगी और न्यायजनणधयन अजधकारी द्वारा हस्ट्ताक्षर दकए िाएंगे। (11) इस जनयम के तहत दकए गए आिेि की एक प्रजत और कायधवाही की अन्य सभी प्रजतयां उस व्यजक्त को जबना दकसी िुल्क के िी िाएंगी, जिसके जवरुद्ध आिेि पाररत दकया गया है। (12) न्यायजनणधयन अजधकारी को, जवरोधी पक्ष को नोरटस िारी करने के तीन माह के भीतर कायधवाही पूरी करनी होगी। 107घ अपीलः- (1) कोई व्यजक्त िो इस जनयम के तहत न्यायजनणधयन अजधकारी के आिेि से असंतुष्ट है तो वह, इस आिेि की तारीख से साठ दिनों के भीतर अपीलीय प्राजधकारी को इलेक्ट्राजनक माध्यम से प्रपत्र 32 में अपील कर सकता है। बिते दक अपीलीय प्राजधकारी उक्त अवजध की समाजप्त के पश्चात भी अपील पर जवचार कर सकता है, यदि वह इस बात से संतुष्ट है दक उस व्यजक्त के पास ऐसी अवजध के भीतर अपील िायर न करने के पयाधप्त कारण हैं। (2) अपील प्राप्त होने पर, अपीलीय प्राजधकारी, नोरटस में यथाजवजनर्िधष्ट ऐसी अवजध के भीतर अपना िवाब िेने के जलए, प्रजतवािी को एक नोरटस िारी करेगा। (3) अपीलीय प्राजधकारी, पक्षकारों को सुनवाई का उजचत अवसर प्रिान करने के पश्चात, एक संगत आिेि पाररत करेगा जिसमें स्ट्थगन के आिेि भी िाजमल हैं और सामान्य रूप से अपील की प्राजप्त की तारीख से छः माह के भीतर कायधवाही पूरी करेंगे। 107 ि. िोनों पक्षों को तामील - (1) इस अध्याय के तहत सभी पत्राचार केवल इलेक्ट्रॉजनक माध्यम से दकए िाएंगे। (2) इस प्रकार के संप्रेषण को जसद्ध करने के जलए यह प्रिर्िधत करना पयाधप्त होगा दक पत्राचार उजचत तरीके से दकया गया था और इसे इलेक्ट्रॉजनक माध्यम से संप्रेजषत दकया गया था। 107झ. समयावजध बढाना. - न्यायजनणधयन अजधकारी अथवा अपीलीय प्राजधकारी, जलजखत रूप में ररकाडध दकए िाने वाले कारणों से, िहां जवलंब या इस दििा में कारधवाई न करने के उजचत कारण मौिूि हैं, इस अध्याय में जवजनर्िधष्ट दकसी अवजध तक बढा सकता है िो ऐसी अवजध होगी जिसे वह उजचत समझता है। 107ठ. आिेि और िाजस्ट्त - (1) इस अध्याय के तहत पाररत प्रत्येक आिेि पर तारीख अंदकत की िाएगी, उस पर जडजिटल रूप से हस्ट्ताक्षर दकए िाएंगे, सभी पक्षों को सूजचत दकया िाएगा और उसे न्यायजनणधयन अजधकारी अथवा अपीलीय प्राजधकारी, िैसा भी मामला हो, के आजधकाररक वेबसाइट पर भी अपलोड दकया िाएगा। (2) इस अध्याय के तहत िाजस्ट्त के िररए वसूली गई सभी राजि भारत की संजचत जनजध में िमा की िाएगी।”
3.
उक्त जनयमों में, िूसरी अनुसूची में,

(क) प्रपत्र िीषधक के अंतगधत, “प्रपत्र सं. 30” और इससे संबंजधत प्रजवजष्टयों के पश्चात, जनम्नजलजखत को िाजमल दकया िाएगा, नामतः -

1.
2.
3.
31.
धारा 124क, जनयम 107ग धारा 120, 122 और 123 के उल्लंघन के जलए जिकायत पर
32.
धारा 124ख, जनयम 107च न्यायजनणधयन अजधकारी के आिेि के जवरुद्ध अपील (ख). उक्त जनयमों की िूसरी अनुसूची में, प्रपत्र 30 के पश्चात, जनम्नजलजखत प्रपत्रों को िाजमल दकया िाएगा, नामतः -

“प्रपत्र 31 पेटेंट अजधजनयम, 1970 (1970 का 39) तथा पेटेंट जनयम, 2003 धारा 120, 122 और 123 के उल्लंघन या चूक के जलए जिकायत [धारा 124क; जनयम 107(1) िेखें]
1. जिकायतकताध का जववरण (अजनवायध) :- क: नाम ख. तामील के जलए पता :
ग. टेलीफोन नं. :
घ. ई-मेल (तामील के जलए)

2. जिकायत का जववरण :- क. कजथत उल्लंघन या चूक होने की जतजथ, समय और घटना :
ख. सभी संबंजधत प्रमुख जववरण िेते हुए उल्लंघन या चूक का ब् यौरा :
ग. जववरण के समथधन में साक्ष्य:
घ. कॉस्ट्ट ब्रेक-अप के साथ क्षजत की अनंजतम राजि (आर्थधक संिभध में)।

मैं/हम..., जिकायतकताध घोषणा करता हं/करते हैं दक यहां उल्लेख दकए गए तथ्य मेरे/हमारी िानकारी, सूचना और जवश्वास के अनुसार सही हैं।

3. जिकायतकताध के हस्ट्ताक्षर:
हस्ट्ताक्षर ...
4. उस वास्ट्तजवक व्यजक्त का नाम, जिसने हस्ट्ताक्षर दकए हैं:
(...)

सेवा में,

न्यायजनणधयन अजधकारी, पेटेंट कायाधलय, स्ट्थान नोट - िो लागू न हो, उसे काट िें।

"प्रपत्र 32” पेटेंट अजधजनयम, 1970 (1970 का 39) तथा पेटेंट जनयम, 2003 न्यायजनणधयन अजधकारी द्वारा िारी आिेि के जवरुद्ध अपील [धारा 124ख, जनयम 107घ(1) िेखें]
1. अपीलकताध का जववरण (अजनवायध):- क. नाम :
ख. तामील के जलए पता :
ग. टेलीफोन नं.:
घ. ई-मेल (तामील के जलए):

2. न्यायजनणधयन अजधकारी द्वारा िारी आिेि का जववरण, जिसके जवरुद्ध अपील िायर की गई हैः- क. मामला सं.
ख. आिेि की तारीख ग. जववरण के समथधन में साक्ष्य

मैं/हम..., जिकायतकताध यह घोषणा करता हूँ/करते हैं दक यहां उल्लेख दकए गए तथ्य मेरी/हमारी सवोिम िानकारी, सूचना और जवश्वास के अनुसार सही हैं।
3. अपीलकताध के हस्ट्ताक्षर:
हस्ट्ताक्षर ...
4. उस वास्ट्तजवक व्यजक्त का नाम, जिसने हस्ट्ताक्षर दकए हैं:
(...)

सेवा में, अपीलीय प्राजधकारी, स्ट्थान नोट - िो लागू न हो, उसे काट िें।” [फा. सं. पी-24031/13/2020-आईपीआर-III] जहमानी पाण्डे, संयुक्ट् त सजचव

नोट: मूल जनयम, भारत के रािपत्र, असाधारण, भाग II, खण्ड 3, उपखण्ड (ii) की अजधसूचना संख्या सा.का.जन. 493 (अ), दिनांक 2 मई, 2003 के माध्यम से प्रकाजित दकए गए थे और अंजतम बार दिनांक 21 जसतंबर, 2021 की अजधसूचना संख्या सा.का.जन. 646 (अ) के माध्यम से संिोजधत दकए गए थे।

MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY (Department for promotion of Industry and Internal Trade) NOTIFICATION New Delhi, the th 16th March, 2024 G.S.R. 215(E).—WHEREAS the draft of certain rules, further to amend the Patents Rules, 2003 was published as required under sub-section (3) of section 159 of the Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 1970), vide notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Commerce & Industry (Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade) number G.S.R. 08(E), dated the 2nd January, 2024 in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, Sub-section (i) inviting objections and suggestions from all person likely to be affected there by before the expiry of a period of thirty days from the date on which copies of the Official Gazette containing the said notification were made available to public;
AND WHEREAS copies of the Official Gazette in which the said notification was published were made available to the public on the 2nd January 2024;
AND WHEREAS the objections and suggestions received from the public in respect of the said draft rules have been considered by the Central Government;
NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 159 of the Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 1970), the Central Government hereby makes the following rules further to amend the Patents Rules, 2003, namely:-
1.
(1) These rules may be called the Patents (Second Amendment) Rules,2024.

(2) They shall comeint of or ceon the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.
2. In the Patents Rules, 2003 (herein after referred to as the said rules), after rule 107, the following chapters shall be inserted namely, - “CHAPTERXIVA ADJUDICATION OF PENALTIES AND APPEALS 107A. Definitions.-In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "adjudicating officer" means an officer authorized under section 124A of the Act;
(b) “Appellant” means a person aggrieved with an order of adjudicating officer and prefers an appeal before the appellate authority under sub-section (1) of section 124B of the Act;
(c) "appellate authority” means an authority officer authorized under sub-section (1) of section 124 B of the Act;
(d)

words and expressions used in these rules and not defined but defined in the Act, shall have the meaning respectively assigned to them in the act.
107 B. Complaint.—(1) Any person may file a complaint in Form 31 through electronic means to the adjudicating officer regarding any contravention committed under sections 120, 122, and 123 of the Act.
107 C. Holding of inquiry. - (1) For the purpose of adjudication under section 124 A of the Act whether any person has committed any contravention as specified in that section, the adjudicating officer shall, issue anotice through electronic means to such person requiring him to show cause within such period as may be specified in the notice (being not less than seven days from the date of service thereof) why an inquiry should not be held against him.
(2) Every notice under sub-rule (1) shall indicate the nature of contravention alleged to have been committed.
(3) After considering the cause, if any, shown by such person, the adjudicating officer is of the opinion that an inquiry should be held, he shall issue a notice requiring the appearance of that person personally or through alegal practitioner duly authorised by him on such date as may be fixed in the notice.
(4) On the date fixed, the adjudicating officer shall explain to the person proceeded against or his legal practitioner, the contravention, committed by such person andthe provisions of the Act, in respect of which contravention is alleged to have committed.

(5) The adjudicating officer shall, then, give an opportunity to such person to produce such documents or evidence as he may consider relevant to the inquiry and if necessary, the hearing maybe adjourned to a future date and in taking such evidence the adjudicating officer shall not bebound to observe the provisions of the Bhartiya Sakshya Adhiniyam 2023 (47 of 2023).
(6) While holding an inquiry under this rule the adjudicating officermay require and enforce the attendance of any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of thecase to give evidence or to produce any document which in the opinion of the adjudicating officer may be useful for or relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry.
(7) If any person fails, neglects or refuses to appear as required by sub-rule (3) before the adjudicating officer, the adjudicating officer may proceed with the inquiry inthe absence of such person after recording the reasons for doing so.
(8) If, upon consideration of the evidence produced before the adjudicating officer, the adjudicating officer is satisfied that the person has committed the contravention, he may, by orderin writing, impose such penalty under the Act as he thinks fit (9) Every order made under sub-rule (8) shall specify the provisions of the Act in respect of which contravention has being committed and shall contain the reasons for imposing the penalty.
(10) Every order made under sub-rule (8) shall be dated and signed by the adjudicating officer.
(11) A copy of the order made under this rule and all other copies of proceedings shall be supplied free of charge to the person against whom the order is made.
(12) The adjudicating officer shall complete the proceeding within the three months form the issuance of the notice to the opposite party.
107 D. Appeal:- (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the adjudicating under this rule, may prefer an appeal in Form 32 through electronic means to appellate authority, within sixty days from the date of the order, to the appellate authority, within sixty days from the date of the order.
Provided that the appellate authority may entertain appeal after the expiry of the said period it he satisfied that he has sufficient cause for the not filling the appeal within such period.
(2) On receipt of the appeal, the appellate authority shall issuea notice requiring, to the Respondent, to file his reply within such period as may be specified in the notice.
(3) The appellate authority shall, after giving the parties a reasonable opportunity of being heard, pass a reasoned order, including an order for adjournment, and complete the proceedings ordinarily within six months from the dateof the receipt of the appeal.
107H. Serving upon parties - (1) All communications under this Chapter shall be transmitted through electronic means only.
(2) In proving such transmission, it shall be sufficient to show that the communication was properly addressed and transmitted through electronic means.
107I. Extension of time.- The adjudicating officer or the appellate authority may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, where there is a reasonable cause for the delay or failure to act, extend any period specified in this chapter till such period as he may thinks fit.
107L. Order and penalties.- (1) Every order under this Chapter, , shall be dated, digitally signed, communicated to all the parties, and also uploaded on theofficial website of the adjudicating officer or the appellate authority as the case may be

(2) All sums realized by way of penalties under this Chapter shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India".
3. In thesaid rules, in the SECOND SCHEDULE, (a)under heading FORMS after, after “Form No.30” and the entries related thereto, the following shall be inserted, namely:

“31.
Section 124A, rule 107C Complaint for contravention ofsections120, 122,and

32.
Section 124B, rule 107F Appeal against an order of the adjudicating officer”

(b) In the second schedule to the said rules, after Form 30, the following forms shall be inserted, namely:
“FORM31 THE PATENTS ACT,1970 (39 OF 1970) and THE PATENTS RULES, 2003 COMPLAINT FOR CONTRAVENTION OR DEFAULT OF SECTIONS 120, 122 and 123 [See section 124A, rule 107(1)]
1. Particulars of Complainant (mandatory): - a.
Name:
b. Address for service:
c.
Contactno.:
d. Email (for service):
2.Of Complaint:- a.
Date, time, and instance of commission of the alleged contravention or default:

b.
Statement of contravention or default setting out all relevant material particulars:

c.
Evidence in support of the statement:

e. Tentative amount of damage (in Monetary terms) with cost break up

I/We ... , the Complainant here in declare that the facts stated here in are correct to the best of my/our knowledge, information and belief.
3.Signature of the Complainant:
Signature...
4. Name of the natural person who has signed:
(...) To, The Adjudicating Officer, The Patent Office, at ...
Note.-Strike out whichever is not applicable.

FORM 32 THE PATENTS ACT, 1970 (39 OF 1970) and THE PATENTS RULES, 2003 APPEAL AGAINST AN ORDER PASSED BY THE ADJUDICATING OFFICER [Section 124B, rule 107D(1)]
1. Particulars of Appellant (mandatory):- a.
Name:

b. Address for service:
c.
Contact no.:
d. Email (for service):
2. Particulars of Order passed by the adjudicating officer against which the appeal is preferred: - a. Case No.:
b. Date of Order:
c. Evidence in support of the statement:
I/We..., the Appellant herein declare that the facts stated herein are correct to the best of my/our knowledge, information and belief.
3.Signature of the Appellant:
Signature...
4.Name of the natural person whoh as signed:
(...) To, The Appellate Authority, at ...
Note.-Strikeout which ever is not applicable”.

[F. No.P-24031/13/2020-IPR-III] HIMANI PANDE Jt. Secy.

Note: The principal rules were published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part-II, Section 3, Sub-Section (ii) vide number S.O. 493 (E) dated the 2nd May, 2003 and last amended vide notification number G.S.R. 646(E) dated the 21st September, 2021

Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. MANOJ KUMAR VERMA Digitally signed by MANOJ KUMAR VERMA Date: 2024.03.16 15:58:56 +05'30'


================================================================================
SOURCE: patent ammendent 2024.pdf
================================================================================

2018 GI/2024 (1)

रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल.- 33004/99 REGD. No. D. L.-33004/99

xxxGIDHxxx xxxGIDExxx असाधारण EXTRAORDINARY भाग II—खण् ड 3—उप-खण् ड (i) PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (i) प्राजधकार से प्रकाजित
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY

वाजणज्य और उद्योग मंत्रालय (उद्योग संवधधन और आंतररक व्यापार जवभाग) अजधसूचना नई दिल्ली, 15 माचध, 2024

सा.का.जन. 211(अ).— िबदक पेटेंट जनयम, 2003 में और संिोधन करने के जलए, पेटेंट अजधजनयम, 1970 (1970 का 39) की धारा 159 की उप धारा (3) की अपेक्षा के अनुसार, कजतपय जनयमों के मसौिे को, वाजणज्य और मंत्रालय (उद्योग संवधधन और आंतररक व्यापार जवभाग) भारत सरकार की अजधसूचना संख्या सा.का.जन. 619 (अ) दिनांक 23 अगस्ट्त, 2023 के द्वारा भारत के रािपत्र, असाधारण, भाग II, खण्ड 3, उप-खण्ड (i) में प्रकाजित दकया गया था, जिसके माध्यम से, इससे प्रभाजवत होने वाले सभी संभाजवत व्यजियों से आपजियां और सुझाव आमंजत्रत दकए गए थे।

और, िबदक, उि अजधसूचना की प्रजतयां आम लोगों को 23 अगस्ट्त, 2023 को उपलब्ध करा िी गईं थीं।

और, िबदक, उि मसौिा जनयमों के संबंध में आम लोगों से प्राप्त आपजियों और सुझावों पर जवजधवत रूप से केंद्र सरकार द्वारा जवचार दकया गया है।

अतः अब, पेटेंट अजधजनयम, 1970 की धारा 159 (1970 का 39) द्वारा प्रिि िजियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, केंद्र सरकार एतद्वारा पेटेंट जनयम, 2003 में और संिोधन करने के जलए जनम्नजलजखत जनयम बनाती है, नामतः -
1.
(1) इन जनयमों को पेटेंट (संिोधन) जनयम, 2024 कहा िाएगा।

(2) ये जनयम आजधकाररक रािपत्र में इनके प्रकािन की तारीख से प्रभावी होंगे। सं. 197] नई दिल्ली, िुक्रवार, माचध 15, 2024/फाल् गुन 25, 1945

No. 197] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, MARCH 15, 2024/PHALGUNA 25, 1945

सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-15032024-253078 CG-DL-E-15032024-253078

2.
पेटेंट जनयम, 2003 में, जिसे इसके बाि उक् त जनयम कहा गया है, जनयम 12 में, - (i) उप जनयम (2) में, ‘ऐसी फाइललंग की तारीख से छ: माह’ िब् िों को ‘जनयम 24ख के उप जनयम (3) अथवा जनयम 24ग के उप जनयम (8) के तहत आपजि का प्रथम जववरण िारी दकए िाने की तारीख से तीन माह’ िब् िों से प्रजतस्ट् थाजपत दकया िाएगा। (ii) उप जनयम खंड (3) के जलए, जनम् नजलजखत उप जनयमों को प्रजतस्ट् थाजपत दकया िाएगा, नामत:-

‘3. जनयंत्रक, भारत के बाहर दकसी िेि में फाइल दकए गए आवेिन से संबंजधत िानकारी पर जवचार करने के जलए, पहुंच वाले और उपलब्ध डाटाबेस का इस्ट् तेमाल कर सकता;
4. जनयंत्रक, धारा 8 की उप-धारा (2) के तह त, जलजखत में ििध दकए िाने वाले कारणों के जलए, जनयंत्रक द्वारा ऐसी सूचना मांगने की तारीख से िो माह के भीतर, आवेिक को प्रपत्र 3 में नया जववरण और घोषणापत्र प्रस्ट् तुत करने का जनिेि िे सकता है।
5. जनयमों में कुछ भी जनजहत होने के बाविूि, जनयंत्रक प्रपत्र 4 में अनुरोध दकए िाने पर 3 माह की अवजध के जलए प्रपत्र 3 की फाइललंग में जवलंब को माफ कर सकता है अथवा समय को बढा सकता है।’
3.
उक् त जनयम के जनयम 13 में उप-जनयम (2) के पश् चात्, जनम् नजलजखत उप जनयम को िाजमल दकया िाएगा, नामत: - ‘(2क) कोई पेटेंट आवेिक, यदि वह चाहे तो, अनंजतम अथवा संपूणध जवजनिेि में उजल्लजखत आजवष् कारों अथवा धारा 16 के अंतगधत आगे आवेिन फाइल करने सजहत, धारा 16 के तहत एक या अजधक भाग के रूप में आगे आवेिन िायर कर सकता है।’
4.
उक् त जनयमों के जनयम 24ख में,- (क) उप-जनयम (1) में, (i) ‘अड़तालीस महीने’ िब् ि िहां भी आया हो, उसे ‘इकतीस महीने’ िब् ि से प्रजतस्ट् थाजपत दकया िाएगा। (ii) उप-जनयम (1) में, खंड (v) के बाि जनम् नजलजखत खंड को िाजमल दकया िाएगा, नामत:- ‘(vi) पेटेंट (संिोधन) जनयम, 2024 के लागू होने से पहले, िायर दकए गए आवेिन के संबंध में, इस उप-जनयम में कुछ भी जनजहत होने के बाविूि, धारा 11ख की उप-धारा (1) के तहत िांच का अनुरोध पेटेंट (संिोधन) जनयम, 2024 के लागू होने से पहले इस उप जनयम के तहत जवजनर्िधष् ट अवजध होगी।’ (ख) उप-जनयम (6) में, ‘उप-जनयम (5) में जवजनर्िधष् ट’ िब् िों, कोष् ठकों और अंकों को ‘इसमें जवजनर्िधष् ट’ िब् िों से प्रजतस्ट् थाजपत दकया िाएगा।
5.
मूल जनयम के जनयम 24ग में, उप-जनयम (11) में, ‘उप-जनयम (10) में जवजनर्िधष्ट’ िब् िों, कोष् ठकों और अंकों को ‘इसमें जवजनर्िधष् ट’ िब् िों से प्रजतस्ट् थाजपत दकया िाएगा।
6.
उक् त जनयमों में, जनयम 29 के बाि, जनम् नजलजखत जनयम को िाजमल दकया िाएगा, नामत: -

‘29क. ररयायत अवजध – धारा 31 के तहत जवजनर्िधष्ट अवजध प्राप् त करने के जलए प्रथम अनुसूची में जवजनर्िधष्ट िुल्क सजहत प्रपत्र 31 में आवेिन िायर दकया िाएगा।’
7.
उक् त जनयमों में, जनयम 55 में:
(क) उप-जनयम (3) को जनम्नजलजखत उप जनयम से प्रजतस्ट्थाजपत दकया िाएगा, नामतः –

“(3) अभ्यावेिन पर जवचार करते हुए यदि जनयंत्रक संतुष्ट है दक - (क) यदि अभ्यावेिन में प्रथम िृष्टया मामला नहीं बनता है, तो वह जवरोधकताध को तिनुसार सूजचत करेगा, और - (i) िब तक जवरोधकताध इस मामले में सुनवाई का अनुरोध नहीं करता है, तब तक जनयंत्रक ऐसी अजधसूचना की तारीख से एक माह के भीतर अभ्यावेिन से इनकार करने के आधारों को ररकॉडध करते हुए एक स्ट्पष्ट आिेि पाररत करेगा।

(ii) यदि जवरोधकताध सुनवाई के जलए अनुरोध करता है, तो जनयंत्रक, जवरोधकताध को सुनवाई का अवसर िेने के बाि, सुनवाई की तारीख से एक माह के भीतर एक स्ट्पष्ट आिेि पाररत करेगा, जिसमें अभ्यावेिन को अस्ट्वीकार करने या प्रथम िृष् टया स्ट्वीकार करने के आधार को ििध दकया िाएगा तथा आवेिक को तिनुसार सूजचत दकया िाएगा।” (ख) अभ् यावेिन में प्रथम िृष् टया मामला बनने पर, जनयंत्रक अभ् यावेिन प्राप् त होने की तारीख से एक माह के भीतर अपने कारणों को ििध करते हुए आिेि पाररत करेगा और आवेिक को तद्नुसार सूजचत करेगा। (ख) उप-जनयम (4) में, िब्ि ‘तीन महीने’ को िब्ि ‘िो महीने’ से प्रजतस्ट्थाजपत दकया िाएगा; और

(ग) उप-जनयम (5) के बाि जनम् नजलजखत उप जनयमों को िाजमल दकया िाएगा, नामत: - “(5क) जनयम 62 के उप-जनयम (2) से (4) में जवजनर्िधष् ट प्रदक्रया, िहां तक संभव हो सके, इस जनयम के तहत सुनवाई की प्रदक्रया पर लागू होगी। (5ख) ऐसा पेटेंट आवेिन, जिसके जलए जवरोध का अभ्यावेिन िायर दकया गया है तथा जनयम 3 के तहत जनयंत्रक द्वारा नोरटस िारी दकया गया है, उसकी जनयम 24ग के अनुसार िांच की िाएगी।”
8.
उक् त जनयमों के जनयम 56 में, उप-जनयम (4) में ‘तीन महीने’ िब् ि को ‘िो महीने’ िब् ि से प्रजतस्ट् थाजपत दकया िाएगा।
9.
उक् त जनयमों के जनयम 70 के बाि, जनम्नजलजखत जनयम िाजमल दकया िाएगा, नामतः- '70क. आजवष्कारकताध का प्रमाणपत्र - (1) जनयंत्रक लागू पेटेंट के संबंध में दकसी आजवष्कारक को, प्रथम अनुसूची में जवजनर्िधष्ट िुल्क के साथ प्रपत्र-8क में आजवष्कारक द्वारा दकए गए अनुरोध पर, आजवष्कारकताध का प्रमाणपत्र िारी कर सकेगा। (2) जनयंत्रक, दकसी आजवष्कारक के अनुरोध पर, प्रथम अनुसूची में जवजनर्िधष्ट िुल्क के साथ प्रपत्र-8क में, प्रवृि पेटेंट के संबंध में आजवष्कारक को आजवष्कारकताध का प्रमाणपत्र की प्रजतजलजप िारी कर सकेगा और इस अनुरोध में उन पररजस्ट्थजतयों का एक जववरण होगा, जिन पररजस्ट्थजतयों में आजवष्कारकताध का मूल प्रमाण पत्र खो गया हो, नष्ट हो गया हो, क्षजतग्रस्ट्त हो गया हो या प्रस्ट्तुत नहीं दकया िा सकता।
10.
उक् त जनयमों के जनयम 80 में, उप-जनयम (3) को जनम् नजलजखत उप-जनयम से प्रजतस्ट् थाजपत दकया िाएगा, नामत: - ‘(3) िो वषध अथवा उससे अजधक की अवजध के जलए िेय वार्षधक नवीकरण िुल् क का अजग्रम भुगतान दकया िा सकता है;
बिते दक िहां कम से कम 4 वषध की अवजध के जलए इलेक् रॉजनक तरीके से नवीकरण िुल् क के जलए अजग्रम भुगतान दकया गया है, वहां, ऐसे भुगतान पर िुल् क में िस प्रजतित की कटौती लागू होगी।’
11.
उक् त जनयमों के जनयम 110 में, उप-जनयम (2) में,- क) ‘पेटेंट अजधजनयम और जनयम’ िब् िों को ‘पेटेंट अजधजनयम, 1970 (1970 का 39), पेटेंट जनयम, 2003, जडिाइन अजधजनयम, 2000 (2000 का 16) और जड िाइन जनयम, 2001’ से प्रजतस्ट् थाजपत दकया िाएगा। ख) ‘पेटेंट जविेषताएं’ िब् िों को ‘पेटेंट जविेषताएं, जडिाइन जविेषताएं’ िब् िों से प्रजतस्ट् थाजपत दकया िाएगा।
12.
उक् त जनयमों के जनयम 131 में, उप-जनयम (2) को जनम् नजलजखत उप-जनयम से प्रजतस्ट् थाजपत दकया िाएगा, नामत:- ‘(2) उप-जनयम (1) में संिर्भधत जववरण तीन जवत् त वषों की प्रत् येक अवजध के संबंध में एक बार प्रस्ट् तुत दकए िाएंगे, जिसकी िुरुआत उस जवत् त वषध के तुरंत बाि िुरू होने वाले जवत् त वषध से होगी जिसमें पेटेंट प्रिान दकया गया था, तथा ये जववरण ऐसी प्रत् येक अवजध की समाजप्त के छ: माह के भीतर प्रस्ट् तुत दकए िाएंगे:
बिते दक जनयंत्रक, प्रपत्र 4 में अनुरोध दकए िाने पर तीन माह तक की अवजध के जलए ऐसे जववरण को िायर करने में हुए जवलंब को क्षमा कर सकता है अथवा समय को बढा सकता है।’

13.
उक् त जनयमों के जनयम 137 को उप जनयम (1) जलखा िाएगा और उप जनयम (1) को यह संख् या िेने के बाि जनम्नजलजखत उप जनयम को िाजमल दकया िाएगा, नामत:- (2) उप-जनयम (1) में जनजहत प्रावधान जनम् नजलजखत से संबंजधत मामलों के जलए लागू नहीं होंगे- (i) जनयम 12 के उपजनयम (5) के तहत समय के जवस्ट्तार या िेरी की माफी; (ii) जनयम 20 का उप-जनयम (4) के खंड (i) और जनयम 20 का उप-जनयम (6); (iii) जनयम 21; (iv) जनयम 24ख का उप-जनयम (1), (5) और (6); (v) जनयम 24ग का उप-जनयम (10) और (11); (vi) जनयम 55 का उपजनयम (4); (vii) जनयम 80 का उपजनयम (1क); (viii) जनयम 130 का उपजनयम (1) और (2); (ix) जनयम 131 का उपजनयम (2)”।
14. उक् त जनयमों के जनयम 138 को जनम्नजलजखत जनयम से प्रजतस्ट्थाजपत दकया िाएगा, नामत: - ‘138. जनधाधररत समय-सीमा को बढाने अथवा जवलंब को माफ करने की िजि- इन जनयमों में कुछ भी जनजहत होने के बाविूि, प्रपत्र 4 में अनुरोध करने पर, दकसी कायध को करने अथवा इनके तहत कोई कायधवाही करने के जलए जनधाधररत समय-सीमा को जनयंत्रक द्वारा 6 माह की अवजध तक बढाया िा सकता है अथवा जवलंब को माफ दकया िा सकता है िहां ऐसा अनुरोध छ: माह की उक् त अवजध समाप्त होने से पूवध दकया गया हो। बिते दक ऐसा अनुरोध छ: माह की जनधाधररत अवजध के भीतर एक से अजधक बार दकया िा सकता है।
15. उक् त जनयमों में पहली अनुसूची के सारणी-1 के जलए, जनम्नजलजखत सारणी प्रजतस्ट्थाजपत की िाएगी, नामत:- सारणी-1 प्रजवजष्ट संख्या जिस पर संिेय है संबद्ध प्रपत्र संख्या ई-फाइललंग के जलए वास्ट्तजवक रूप में फाइल करने के जलए व्यजि (व्यजियों) अथवा स्ट्टाटधअप (अप् स) अथवा छोटी कंपनी/(यों) अथवा िैजक्षक संस्ट्थान(नों) के जलए अन्य, अकेले या व्यजि (व्यजियों) अथवा स्ट्टाटधअप (अप् स) अथवा छोटी कंपनी/(यों) अथवा िैजक्षक संस्ट्थान (नों) के जलए व्यजि (व्यजियों) अथवा स्ट्टाटधअप (अप् स) अथवा छोटी कंपनी /(यों) अथवा िैजक्षक संस्ट्थान (नों) के जलए अन्य, अकेले या व्यजि (व्यजियों) अथवा स्ट्टाटधअप (अप् स) अथवा छोटी कंपनी /(यों) अथवा िैजक्षक संस्ट्थान (नों) के जलए

रुपए रुपए रुपए रुपए
1.
अनंजतम या पूणध जवजिष्टताओं के साथ धारा 7, 54* और 135 और जनयम 20(1) के अधीन दकसी पेटेंट के जलए आवेिन पर -

प्रत्येक अलग वरीयता के जलए 1600 के गुणि में प्रत्येक अलग वरीयता के जलए 8000 के गुणि में प्रत्येक अलग वरीयता के जलए 1750 के गुणि में प्रत्येक अलग वरीयता के जलए 8800 के गुणि में

(i) 30 के अजतररि प्रत्येक जववरण पन्ने के जलए, जनयम (9) के उप जनयम (3) के अधीन न्यूजक्लयोटाइड और/या अमीनो अम्ल के अनुसूची क्रम को छोड़कर;

(i) 160 (i) 800 (i) 180 (i) 880

(ii) 10 के अजतररि प्रत्येक िावे के जलए;

(ii) 320 (ii) 1600 (ii) 350 (ii) 1750

(iii) जनयम (9) के उप जनयम (3) के अधीन न्यूजक्लयोटाइड और/या अमीनो अम्ल के अनुसूची क्रम के प्रत्येक पृष्ठ के जलए।
* धारा 54 के तहत पेटेंट के जलए दकया गया आवेिन अन्य आवेिनों की तुलना में िुल्क में

(iii) 160 अजधकतम 24000 के अध् यधीन (iii) 800 अजधकतम 120000 के अध् यधीन अनुमत नहीं अनुमत नहीं

50 प्रजतित की कमी हेतु पात्र होगा।
2.
अनंजतम जववरण के पश्चात् सम्पूणध जववरण फाइल करने पर 30 पृष्ठ तक जिसमें 10 िावे तक हों - कोई िुल्क नहीं

कोई िुल्क नहीं

कोई िुल्क नहीं

कोई िुल्क नहीं

(i) 30 के अजतररि प्रत्येक जववरण पन्ने के जलए, जनयम (9) के उप-जनयम (3) के अधीन न्यूजक्लयोटाइड और/या अमीनो अम्ल के अनुसूची क्रम को छोड़कर;

(i) 160 (i) 800 (i) 180 (i) 880

(ii) 10 के अजतररि प्रत्येक िावे के जलए।

(ii) 320 (ii) 1600 (ii) 350 (ii) 1800

(iii) जनयम (9) के उप-जनयम (3) के अधीन न्यूजक्लयोटाइड और, या अमीनो अम्ल के अनुसूची क्रम के प्रत्येक पृष्ठ के जलए । नोट: धारा 54 के तहत पेटेंट के जलए दकए गए आवेिन से संबंजधत कोई जवजिजष्ट अन्य जवजिजष्टयों की तुलना में िुल्क में 50 प्रजतित की कमी हेतु पात्र होगी।

(iii) 160 अजधकतम 24000 के अध् यधीन (iii) 800 अजधकतम 120000 के अध् यधीन अनुमजत नहीं अनुमजत नहीं
3.
धारा 8 के अधीन कथन और वचनबद्धता िायर करने पर। कोई िुल्क नहीं

कोई िुल्क नहीं

कोई िुल्क नहीं

कोई िुल्क नहीं
4.
i) धारा 53(2) और 142(4), जनयम 13(6), 80(1क) और 130 (प्रजतमाह) के अन्तगधत समय जवस्ट्तार हेतु अनुरोध। ii) जनयम 12 के उप-जनयम (4) या उपजनयम (2) या जनयम 131 के तहत समय के जवस्ट्तार या िेरी की माफी (प्रजत माह) के अनुरोध पर। iii) जनयम 24 ख के उप-जनयम (6) के अधीन समय जवस्ट्तार के अनुरोध पर (प्रजत माह) iv) जनयम 24 ग के उप-जनयम (11) के अधीन समय जवस्ट्तार के अनुरोध पर (प्रजत माह)

v) जनयम 138 के अधीन समय जवस्ट्तार के अनुरोध पर (प्रजत माह)
5.
जनयम 13 के उप-जनयम (6) के अधीन आजवष्कारवृजि के अनुसार घोषणा िायर करने पर। कोई िुल्क नहीं

कोई िुल्क नहीं

कोई िुल्क नहीं

कोई िुल्क नहीं

6.
अगली तारीख के जलए आवेिन पर।
-
7.
धारा 19(2) के अधीन संिभध के लोप हेतु आवेिन पर। रकतरकतरकतरतकरत कतकतक
-

8.
(i) धारा 20(1) के अधीन िावे पर;

(ii) धारा 20(4) या 20(5) के अधीन जनिेि के जलए अनुरोध पर।
9.
(i) धारा 25 (2) के तहत पेटेंट प्रिान करने पर जवरोध की सूचना पर अनुमजत नहीं अनुमजत नहीं

(ii) धारा 25 (1) के तहत पेटेंट प्रिान करने पर जवरोध के प्रस्ट्तुतीकरण पर 7 क अनुमजत नहीं अनुमजत नहीं
10.
जनयम 62 (2) के अधीन यह नोरटस िेने पर दक जनयंत्रक के समक्ष सुनवाई में उपजस्ट्थत रहा िाएगा।
-
11.
धारा 28(2), के अधीन आवेिन पर। कोई िुल्क नहीं कोई िुल्क नहीं कोई िुल्क नहीं कोई िुल्क नहीं

धारा 28(3) या धारा 28(7) के अधीन आवेिन पर।
12.
जनयम 70क के तहत आजवष्कारक का प्रमाण पत्र। 8क लागू नहीं लागू नहीं
13.
धारा 11क(2) और जनयम 24क के अधीन प्रकािन हेतु अनुरोध।
14.
धारा 44 के अधीन पेटेंट के संिोधन के जलए आवेिन पर।
15.
धारा 51(1) या 51(2) के अधीन जनिेि के जलए आविेन पर।
16.
धारा 26(1) और 52(2) के अधीन पेटेंट प्रिान करने के जलए अनुरोध पर।

17.
धारा 55(1) के अधीन पेटेंट के पररवधधन को एक स्ट्वतंत्र पेटेंट में बिलने करने के अनुरोध पर।
-
18.
धारा 53 के अधीन पेटेंट के नवीनीकरण के जलए -

(i) पेटेंट की तारीख से िूसरे वषध की समाजप्त से पूवध तीसरे वषध के संबंध में;
- (ii) तीसरे वषध की समाजप्त से पूवध चौथे वषध के संबंध में;
- (iii) चौथे वषध की समाजप्त से पूवध पांचवे वषध के संबंध में;
- (iv) पांचवे वषध की समाजप्त से पूवध छठे वषध के संबंध में;
- (v) छठे वषध की समाजप्त से पूवध सातवें वषध के संबंध में;
- (vi) सातवें वषध की समाजप्त से पूवध आठवें वषध के संबंध में;
- (vii) आठवें वषध की समाजप्त से पूवध नवें वषध के संबंध में;
- (viii) नवें वषध की समाजप्त से पूवध िसवें वषध के संबंध में;
- (ix) िसवें वषध की समाजप्त से पूवध ग्यारहवें वषध के संबंध में;
- (x) ग्यारहवें वषध की समाजप्त से पूवध बारहवें वषध के संबंध में;
- (xi) बारहवें वषध की समाजप्त से पूवध तेरहवें वषध के संबंध में;
- (xii) तेरहवें वषध की समाजप्त से पूवध चौिहवें वषध के संबंध में;
-

(xiii) चौिहवें वषध की समाजप्त से पूवध पन्द्रहवें वषध के संबंध में;
- (xiv) पन्द्रहवें वषध की समाजप्त से पूवध सोलहवें वषध के संबंध में;
- (xv) सोलहवें वषध की समाजप्त से पूवध सत्रहवें वषध के संबंध में;
- (xvi) सत्रहवें वषध की समाजप्त से पूवध अठारहवें वषध के संबंध में;
- (xvii) अठारहवें वषध की समाजप्त से पूवध उन्नीसवें वषध के संबंध में;
- (xviii) उन्नीसवें वषध की समाजप्त से पूवध बीसवें वषध के संबंध में।

19.
धारा 57 के अधीन पेटेंट के जलए आवेिन या सम्पूणध जवजनिेि या अन्य संबद्ध िस्ट्तावेिों के संिोधन के जलए आवेिन पर -

(i) पेटेंट प्रिान करने से पूवध;
(ii) पेटेंट प्रिान करने के पश्चात्;
(iii) िहााँ नाम या पता या राष्ट्रीयता या सेवाथध पते में संिोधन होना है।
20.
धारा 57(4), 61(1) और 87(2) के अधीन दकसी आवेिन के जवरोध की सूचना या धारा 63(3) के अधीन पेटेंट के अभ्यपधण या धारा 78(5) के अधीन अनुरोध पर।
21.
धारा 60 के अधीन पेटेंट के प्रत्यावतधन के जलए आवेिन पर।
22.
धारा 61(3) और जनयम 86(1) के अधीन प्रत्यावतधन के जलए अजतररि िुल्क। —
23.
धारा 63 के अधीन पेटेंट के अभ्यपधण की प्रस्ट्थापना की नोरटस पर। — कोई िुल्क नहीं कोई िुल्क नहीं कोई िुल्क नहीं कोई िुल्क नहीं
24.
धारा 69(1) या 69(2) और जनयम 90(1) या 90 (2) के अधीन दकसी व्यजि के दकसी पेटेंट या उसके अंि के हकिार या बन्धकिार के रूप में या दकसी व्यजि के लाइसेंसधारी के रूप में या अन्यथा के रूप में पेटेंट रजिस्ट्टर में नाम की प्रजवजष्ट के जलए या दकसी िस्ट्तावेज़ की अजधसूचना की पेटेंट रजिस्ट्टर में प्रजवजष्ट के जलए आवेिन पर। (प्रत्येक पेटेंट के संबंध में) 8,000 (प्रत्येक पेटेंट के संबंध में) (प्रत्येक पेटेंट के संबंध में) 8,800 (प्रत्येक पेटेंट के संबंध में)
25.
जनयम 94 (1) या जनयम 118 (1) के अधीन पेटेंट रजिस्ट्टर या पेटेंट अजभकताध रजिस्ट्टर में दकसी प्रजवजष्ट के पररवतधन के जलए आविेन पर। —
26.
जनयम 94(3) के अधीन पेटेंट रजिस्ट्टर में अजतररि सेवाथध पते की प्रजवजष्ट करने के जलए अनुरोध पर। —
27.
धारा 84 (1), 91 (1), 92(1) और धारा 92क के अधीन अजनवायध लाइसेंस के जलए आवेिन पर।
28.

पेटेंट के जलए आविेन के परीक्षण हेतु अनुरोध पर -

(i) धारा 11ख और जनयम 24 (1) के अधीन;

(ii) जनयम 20(4)(ii) के अधीन।

29.
जनयम 24ग के अधीन पेटेंट के आवेिन के त्वररत परीक्षण के अनुरोध पर। 18 क 8000 अनुमजत नहीं अनुमजत नहीं
30.
जनयम 24 ख के अधीन परीक्षण के जलए िायर अनुरोध को जनयम 24 ग के अधीन िीघ्र परीक्षण के अनुरोध में पररवर्तधत करने पर। 18 क 4000 अनुमजत नहीं अनुमजत नहीं
31.
धारा 85 (1) के अधीन पेटेंट को रद्द करने के जलए आवेिन पर।
32.
धारा 88(4) के अधीन लाइसेंस के जनबंधनों और ितों के पुनरीक्षण के जलए आवेिन पर।
33.
धारा 94 के अधीन अजनवायध लाइसेंस की समाजप्त के जलए अनुरोध पर।
34.
जनयम 109 (1) या जनयम 112 के अधीन पेटेंट अजभकताध के रूप में रजिस्ट्रीकरण के जलए आवेिन पर। लागू नहीं

लागू नहीं

35.
जनयम 109 (3) के अधीन अहधक परीक्षा में सजम्मजलत होने के जलए अनुरोध पर। — लागू नहीं

लागू नहीं

36.
पेटेंट अजभकताध रजिस्ट्टर में दकसी व्यजि के नाम के बने रहने के जलए —

(i) पहले वषध के जलए रजिस्ट्रीकरण के साथ संिि की िाने वाली;
— लागू नहीं

लागू नहीं

(ii) पहले वषध को छोड़कर प्रत्येक वषध के जलए प्रत्येक वषध की पहली अप्रैल को संिि की िाने वाली। — लागू नहीं

लागू नहीं

37.
जनयम 111क के अधीन पेटेंट अजभकताध के प्रमाण-पत्र की िूसरी प्रजत के जलए।
-- लागू नहीं

लागू नहीं

38.
जनयम 117 (1) के अधीन पेटेंट अजभकताध रजिस्ट्टर में दकसी व्यजि के नाम के प्रत्यावतधन के जलए आविेन पर। (प्रजवजष्ट संख्या 36 के अधीन िारी रखने की िुल्क के अलावा लागू नहीं (प्रजवजष्ट संख्या 36 के अधीन िारी रखने की िुल्क के अलावा लागू नहीं
39.
धारा 78(2) के अधीन जलजपकीय त्रुरटयों की िुजद्ध के जलए अनुरोध पर। —
40.
धारा 77(1)(च) या 77(1) (छ) के अधीन जनयंत्रक के जनणधय या आिेि की समीक्षा या लंजबत रखने के जलए आविेन पर।
41.
धारा 39 और जनयम 71(1) के अधीन भारत से बाहर पेटेंट के आविेन के जलए अनुमजत हेतु आविेन पर।
42.
धारा 154 और जनयम 132 के अधीन डुजप्लकेट पेटेंट के जलए आविेन पर। —

43. (i) धारा 72 के अधीन प्रमाजणत प्रजतयों के जलए या धारा 147 और जनयम 133 (1) के अधीन प्रमाण-पत्र के जलए अनुरोध पर। — (30 पृष्ठ तक और उसके पश्चात् प्रत्येक अजतररि पृष्ठ के जलए
30)

(30 पृष्ठ तक और उसके पश्चात् प्रत्येक अजतररि पृष्ठ के जलए
150) (30 पृष्ठ तक और उसके पश्चात् प्रत्येक अजतररि पृष्ठ के जलए
30)

(30 पृष्ठ तक और उसके पश्चात् प्रत्येक अजतररि पृष्ठ के जलए
150)

(ii) धारा 72 के अधीन प्रमाजणत प्रजतयों के अनुरोध पर या धारा 147 और जनयम 133(2) के अधीन प्रमाण पत्र के जलए।

-- (30 पृष्ठ तक और उसके पश्चात् प्रत्येक अजतररि पृष्ठ के जलए
30) (30 पृष्ठ तक और उसके पश्चात् प्रत्येक अजतररि पृष्ठ के जलए 30) (30 पृष्ठ तक और उसके पश्चात् प्रत्येक अजतररि पृष्ठ के जलए
30) (30 पृष्ठ तक और उसके पश्चात् प्रत्येक अजतररि पृष्ठ के जलए
30)
44. प्रत्येक मुदद्रत, कायाधलय प्रजतयों के प्रमाणन के जलए। —
45. धारा 72 के अधीन रजिस्ट्टर के जनरीक्षण, जनयम 27 या जनयम 74क के अधीन जनरीक्षण के जलए अनुरोध पर। —
46. धारा 153 और जनयम 134 के अधीन सूचना हेतु अनुरोध पर। —
47. पेटेंट अजभकताध के प्राजधकार के प्रपत्र पर। कोई िुल्क नहीं कोई िुल्क नहीं कोई िुल्क नहीं कोई िुल्क नहीं
48. ऐसी याजचका पर िो अन्यथा उपलब्ध नहीं है। —
49. िस्ट्तावेिों की फोटो प्रजतयां उपलब् ध कराने के जलए प्रजत पृष्ठ। —
50.
अंतराधष्ट्रीय आविेन के जलए पारेषण िुल्क। —
51. अंतराधष्ट्रीय आवेिन के जलए पारेषण िुल्क (ईपीसीटी िायर करने के जलए)। — कोई िुल्क नहीं कोई िुल्क नहीं लागू नहीं लागू नहीं
52. वरीयता िस्ट्तावेज़ की प्रामाजणक प्रजत तैयार करने और उसे जवश्व बौजद्धक सम्पिा संगठन के अंतराधष्ट्रीय ब्यूरो को पारेजषत करने के जलए। — (30 पृष्ठ तक और उसके पश्चात् प्रत्येक अजतररि पृष्ठ के जलए 30) (30 पृष्ठ तक और उसके पश्चात् प्रत्येक अजतररि पृष्ठ के जलए
150) (30 पृष्ठ तक और उसके पश्चात् प्रत्येक अजतररि पृष्ठ के जलए
30) (30 पृष्ठ तक और उसके पश्चात् प्रत्येक अजतररि पृष्ठ के जलए
150)
53. वरीयता िस्ट्तावेज़ की प्रामाजणक प्रजत तैयार करने और डब् ल् यूआईपी डीएएस के माध्यम से ईपारेषण के जलए। — कोई िुल्क नहीं कोई िुल्क नहीं लागू नहीं लागू नहीं
54. धारा 146(2) और जनयम 131(1) के अधीन भारत में पेटेंट प्राप्त आजवष्कार के वाजणजज्यक स्ट्तर पर कायधकरण से संबंजधत जववरण पर। कोई िुल्क नहीं कोई िुल्क नहीं कोई िुल्क नहीं कोई िुल्क नहीं

55. छोटी कंपनी, स्ट्टाटधअप अथवा पात्र िैक्षजणक संस्ट् थान होने का िावा करने के जलए प्रस्ट्तुत दकए िाएंगे कोई िुल्क नहीं कोई िुल्क नहीं कोई िुल्क नहीं कोई िुल्क नहीं
56. धारा 11ख (4) और जनयम 7 (4क) और 26 के अधीन आवेिन वापस लेने हेतु अनुरोध कोई िुल्क नहीं कोई िुल्क नहीं कोई िुल्क नहीं कोई िुल्क नहीं
57. जनयम 129क के अधीन सुनवाई के स्ट्थगन के जलए अनुरोध (प्रत्येक स्ट्थगन के जलए)।
-
58. जनयम 8(2) के अधीन जवजवध प्रपत्र, िब अन्य कोई प्रपत्र जनधाधररत न दकया गया हो तब प्रयोग करने के जलए।

यथा लागू
59. ररयायत अवजध 2750”

16. उक् त जनयमों में, िूसरी अनुसूची में, प्रारूपों की सूची में,- (i) " प्रपत्र-4" के अनुरूप प्रजवजष्ट के जलए, जनम्नजलजखत प्रजवजष्ट को प्रजतस्ट्थाजपत दकया िाएगा, अथाधत्: - "4.
धारा 53(2) और 142(4), जनयम 12(5), 13(6), 24ख(6), 24ग(11), 80(1क), 130 और 138.
समय बढाने या िेरी के जलए क्षमा के जलए अनुरोध। (ii) "प्रपत्र-8" के अनुरूप प्रजवजष्ट के बाि, जनम्नजलजखत प्रजवजष्ट को प्रजतस्ट्थाजपत दकया िाएगा, अथाधत्: - “8क.
जनयम 70क.
इन्वेंरी का प्रमाण पत्र।”;

(iii) "प्रपत्र-30" के अनुरूप प्रजवजष्ट के बाि, जनम्नजलजखत प्रजवजष्ट डाली िाएगी, अथाधत्: - "31.
धारा 31 और जनयम 29क ररयायत अवजध”.

17. उक् त जनयमों में, िूसरी अनुसूची में,- (i) “प्रपत्र संख्या 1” के स्ट्थान पर जनम्नजलजखत प्रारूप रखा िाएगा, अथाधत:- प्रपत्र 1 पेटेंट अजधजनयम 1970 (1970 का 39) और पेटेंट जनयम, 2003 पेटेंट के अनुिि के जलए आवेिन (धारा 7, 54 और जनयम 135 तथा जनयम 20 का उप-जनयम (1) िेजखए) (केवल कायाधलय उपयोग के जलए)

आवेिन संख्या.

फाइल दकए िाने की तारीख:

संिि िुल्क की राजि:

सीबीआर संख्या:

हस्ट्ताक्षर:

1. आवेिक का संिभध/पहचान क्रमांक (िो कायाधलय द्वारा आवंरटत)

2. आवेिन का प्रकार [उजचत श्रेणी में ( ) का जनिान लगाएं] साधारण ( ) कन्वेन्िन ( ) पीसीटी-एनपी ( ) पीपीए च ( ) प्रभागीय ( ) अजतरि पेटेंट ( ) प्रभागीय ( ) अजतरि पेटेंट ( )

प्रभागीय ( ) अजतरि पेटेंट ( )

3क. आवेिक (आवेिकों का) पूरा नाम ललंग (वैकजल्पक) राष्ट्रीयता जनवास का िेि आयु (प्राकृजतक व्यजियों के जलए वैकजल्पक) आवेिक का पता

- पुरुष
- स्त्री
- अन्य
- प्रकट करना नहीं चाहते

- वषध
- प्रकट करना नहीं चाहते मकान नं.

गली

िहर

राज्य

िेि

जपन कोड

ईमेल ( टीपी सत्यापन अजनवायधसंपादित दकया िाएगा)

िूरभाष संख्या ( टीपी सत्यापन अजनवायधसंपादित दकया िाएगा)

3ख. आवेिक की श्रेणी [कृपया उजचत श्रेणी में ( ) रटक लगाएाँ] प्रकृत व्यजि ( ) प्रकृत व्यजि से जभन्न ( ) जिक्षण संस्ट्थान ( )

छोटी कंपनी ( ) स्ट्टाटधअप ( ) अन्य ( )

4. आजवष्कारक(आजवष्कारकों) [कृपया समुजचत श्रेणी में ( ) का जनिान लगाएाँ] क्या सभी आजवष्कारक (आजवष्कारकों) का नाम ऊपर नाजमत आवेिक (आवेिकों) के समान है?
हााँ ( ) नहीं ( ) यदि “नहीं” तो आजवष्कारक (आजवष्कारकों) का ब्यौरा प्रस्ट्तुत करें पूरा नाम ललंग (प्राकजतक व्यजियों के जलए वैकजल्पक) राष्ट्रीयता आयु (वैकजल्पक, प्राकृजतक व्यजियों के जलए) जनवास का िेि आजवष्कारक का पता

- पुरुष
- स्त्री
- अन्य
- प्रकट करना नही चाहते

- वषध
- प्रकट करना नही चाहते

मकान नं.

गली

िहर

राज्य

िेि

जपन कोड

5. आजवष्कार का नाम

6. प्राजधकृत पंिीकृत पेटेंट अजभकताध(ओं) आईएन/पीए संख्या

नाम

मोबाइल नं. ( टीपी सत्यापन अजनवायधसंिोजधत दकया िाएगा)

7. भारत में आवेिक की सेवाओं के जलए पता

नाम

डाक पता

िूरभाष नं.

मोबाइल नं. ( टीपी सत्यापन अजनवायधसंिोजधत दकया िाएगा)

फैक्स नं.

ई-मेल आईडी ( टीपी सत्यापन अजनवायधसंिोजधत दकया िाएगा)

8.कन्वेन्िन िेि में आवेिन को प्राथजमकता दिए िाने का िावा करने के आवेिन के मामले में, कन्वेन्िन आवेिन का जववरण िेि आवेिन संख्या फाइल दकए िाने की तारीख आवेिक का नाम आजवष्कार का नाम आईपीसी (िैसा कन्वेन्िन िेि में वगीकृत है)

9. पेटेंट सहकाररता संजध (पे.स.सं.) राष्ट्रीय चरण आवेिन के मामले में, पेटेंट सहकाररता संजध (पे.स.सं.) के अधीन फाइल दकए गए अंतराधष्ट्रीय आवेिन का जववरण अंतराधष्ट्रीय आवेिन सं.
अंतराधष्ट्रीय फाइल दकए िाने की तारीख

10. धारा 16 के अधीन प्रभागीय आवेिन फाइल दकए िाने के जलए, मूल (प्रथम) आवेिन की जवजिजष्टयां मूल (प्रथम) आवेिन सं.
मूल (प्रथम) आवेिन के फाइल करने की तारीख

11. अजतररि पेटेंट फाइल दकए िाने के जलए, धारा 54 के अधीन फाइल आवेिन, मुख्य आवेिन या पेटेंट की जवजिजष्टयां मुख्य आवेिन/ पेटेंट सं.
मुख्य आवेिन फाइल दकए िाने की तारीख
12. घोषणाएं (i) आजवष्कारक (कों) द्वारा घोषणा (आवेिक समनुिेजिती होने पर): आजवष्कारक (कों) के साथ साथ नीचे हस्ट्ताक्षर कर सकते हैं या आवेिक समनुिेिन अपलोड कर सकता है या इस पेटेंट आवेिन के साथ समनुिेिन संलग्न कर सकता है, या समनुिेिन को जनधाधररत अवजध में डाक/सम्यक रूप से अजधप्रमाजणत पारेषण द्वारा प्रेजषत कर सकता है। मैं/हम उपरोि नाजमत आजवष्कारक(कों) इस आजवष्कार के जलए सही और प्रथम आजवष्कारक(कों) हाँ/हैं और घोषणा करता हाँ/करते हैं दक आवेिक (कों) मेरा/हमारा समनुिेजिती या जवजधक प्रजतजनजध हा/हैं। (क) दिनांक

(ख) हस्ट्ताक्षर

(ग) नाम

(ii) कन्वेन्िन िेि में आवेिक(कों) द्वारा घोषणा (कन्वेन्िन िेि का आवेिक भारत के आवेिक से जभन्न होने पर: कन्वेन्िन िेि का आवेिक साथ साथ नीचे हस्ट्ताक्षर कर सकता है या भारत में आवेिक कन्वेन्िन िेि के आवेिक के समनुिेिन को अपलोड कर सकता है या इस पेटेंट आवेिन के साथ समनुिेिन संलग्न कर सकता है या समनुिेिन को जनधाधररत अवजध में डाक/सम्यक रूप से अजधप्रमाजणत पारेषण द्वारा प्रेजषत कर सकता है। मैं/हम, कन्वेन्िन िेि में आवेिक (कों) के रूप में घोषणा करता हाँ/ करते हैं दक इसके आवेिक मेरे/हमारे सुमनुिेजिती है। (क) तारीख

(ख) हस्ट्ताक्षर

(ग) नाम (iii) आवेिक (कों) द्वारा घोषणा मैं/हम आवेिक (कों) घोषणा करता हाँ/करते हैं दक: -

ऊपर वर्णधत आजवष्कार मेरे/हमारे कब्िे में हैं।

आजवष्कार से संबजन्धत अनंजतम/पूणध जवजनिेि इस आवेिन के साथ फाइल दकया गया है।

जवजनिेि में प्रकट दकए गए आजवष्कार में भारत से िैजवक सामाग्री का उपयोग दकया िाता है और मैं/हम, मुझे/हमें पेटेंट अनुिि दकए िाने से पूवध सक्षम प्राजधकारी से आवश्यक अनुज्ञा प्रस्ट्तुत करूंगा/करेंगे।

मुझे/हमें पेटेंट अनुिि दकए िाने के जलए आक्षेप का कोई जवजधपूणध आधार नहीं है।

मैं/हम सही और प्रथम आजवष्कारक हाँ/हैं।

मैं/हम सही और प्रथम आजवष्कारक (कों) के समनुिेजिती या जवजधक प्रजतजनजध हाँ/हैं।

मेरे/हमारे आजवष्कार की बाबत आवेिन या आवेिनों में से प्रत्येक जिनका जवजिजष्टयां पैरा 8 में दिया गया है, कन्वेंिन िेि/िेिों में पहला आवेिन था।

मैं/हम कन्वेंिन िेि/िेिों में फाइल दकए गए ऊपर उजल्लजखत आवेिन (नों) से पूर्वधिा का िावा करता हाँ/करते हैं और कथन करता हाँ/ करते हैं दक आजवष्कार की बाबत संरक्षण के जलए कोई आवेिन कन्वेंिन िेि में उस तारीख से पहले मेरे/हमारे द्वारा या दकसी ऐसे व्यजि द्वारा जिससे मैं/हम हक व्युत्पन्न करता हाँ/करते हैं, नहीं दकया गया है।

मेरा/हमारा भारत में आवेिन पैरा 09 में यथा उजल्लजखत पेटेंट सहकाररता संजध (पे.स.सं।) के अधीन अंतराधष्ट्रीय आवेिन पर आधाररत है।

आवेिन मेरे/हमारे आवेिन में से जवभाजित दकया गया है, जिसमे पृथक आजवष्कार बहुलता में िाजमल हैं, जिनका जववरण पैरा 10 में दिया गया है और प्राथधना है दक आवेिन को अजधजनयम की धारा 16 के अधीन तारीख ...को फाइल दकया गया समझा िाए।

उि आजवष्कार, उस आजवष्कार का सुधार या उपांतरण है जिसका जववरण पैरा 11 में दिया गया है।
13. आवेिन के साथ जनम्नजलजखत संलग्नक हैं (क) प्रपत्र 2 मि जववरण िुल्क रटप्पजणयां पूणध/अनंजतम जवजनिेि # पृष्ठों की संख्या

िावा(िावे) की संख्या िावों की संख्या और पृष्ठों की संख्या

सार पृष्ठों की संख्या

आरेखण (ओं) की संख्या आरेखण की संख्या और पृष्ठों की संख्या

# पूणध जवजनिेि मे, यदि आवेिक अनंजतम जवजनिेि के साथ फाइल आरेखनों को जनयम 13(4) के अधीन पूणध जवजनिेि के आरेखन या आरेखनों के भाग के रूप में अपनाना चाहता है, अनंजतम जवजनिेि के ऐसे पृष्ठों के क्रमांक का अंतजतम जविेिों के साथ उल्लेख करना अपेजक्षत है। (ख) पूणध जवजनिेि (अंतराधष्ट्रीय आवेिन के अनुरूप) / अंतराधष्ट्रीय प्रारंजभक परीक्षण प्राजधकरण (अ.प्रा.प.प्रा.) के पूवध यथा संिोजधत, यथा लागू (िो प्रजतयां) (ग) इलेक्रोजनक प्रारूप रूप में अनुक्रम सूची (घ) आरेखण (अंतराधष्ट्रीय आवेिन के अनुरूप)/ अंतराधष्ट्रीय प्रारंजभक परीक्षण प्राजधकरण (अ.प्रा.प.प्रा.) के पूवध यथा संिोजधत, यथा लागू (िो प्रजतयां)

(ड.) प्राथजमकता िस्ट् तावेि अथवा आवेिक द्वारा डीएएस (जडजिटल एक् सेस सर्वधस) में मौिूिा प्राथजमकता िस्ट् तावेि (िस्ट् तावेिों) प्राप् त करने के जलए फाइललंग के प्रथम कायाधलय को पहले ही अनुरोध दकए िाने की जस्ट्थजत में डीएएस से प्राथजमकता िस्ट् तावेि पुन:
प्राप् त करने का अनुरोध (च) प्राथजमकता िस्ट्तावेि/जवजनिेि/अंतराधष्ट्रीय िांच ररपोटध/ पेटेंट योग्यता पर अंतराधष्ट्रीय प्रारंजभक ररपोटध का अनुवाि। (छ) प्रपत्र 3 में जववरण और वचनबंध (ि) प्रपत्र 5 में आजवष्कार दकए िाने की घोषणा (झ) प्राजधकारी की िजि (ञ) ...

कुल िुल्क ...रुपए नकि/बेंकर चैक/ बैंक ड्राफ्ट सं॰ द्वारा ... तारीख ...बैंक ...

मैं/हम घोषणा करता हाँ/करते हैं दक इसमे कजथत तथ्य और सामग्री मेरे/हमारे सवोिम ज्ञान, िानकारी और जवश्वास के अनुसार सही हैं और मैं/हम अनुरोध करता हाँ/करते हैं दक उि आजवष्कार के जलए मुझे/हमें पेटेंट अनुिि दकया िाये।

...आि तारीख ...20...
हस्ट्ताक्षर:
नाम:
सेवा में, पेटेंट जनयंत्रक पेटेंट कायाधलय पता...
रटप्पण: -
*एक से अजधक प्रजवजष्ट की ििा में बाक्सों को िोहराएं।
*आवेिक (कों) या प्राजधकृत रजिस्ट्रीकृत अजभकताध द्वार अन्यथा िहां उजल्लजखत हो, हस्ट्ताक्षर दकया िाये।
*पैरा 12 की घोषणा में िो लागू हो/नहीं लागू हो उस पर सही ( )/क्रास (x) का जनिान लगाएं।
*अजवष्कारक और आवेिक का पूरा, उप-नाम िुरूआत में िें
*उस/उन भाग/भागों को काट िें िो लागू नहीं होता है/होते हैं।
*िुल्क के जलए पहली अनुसूची िेजखए।“;

(ii) “प्रपत्र संख्या 3” के स्ट्थान पर जनम्नजलजखत प्रपत्र रखा िाएगा, अथाधत:- प्रपत्र 3 पेटेंट अजधजनयम, 1970 (1970 का 39) और पेटेंट जनयम, 2003 धारा 8 के अधीन कथन और वचनबंध (जनयम 12 का उप जनयम (2) और (3) िेखें)
1. आवेिक (कों) का नाम मैं/हम...
...
...
...
..
एतिद्वारा घोषणा करता हाँ/करते हैं:
2. संयुि आवेिक का नाम, पता और राष्ट्रीयता (i) दक मैंने/हमने भारत में अकेले/संयुि रूप से ... के साथ दिनांक ..., को पेटेंट संख्या ...के जलए आवेिन दकया है,

(ii) यह दक मैंने/ हमने उसी आजवष्कार/मूलतः उसी आजवष्कार के जलए भारत से बाहर आवेिन नहीं दकया है या (iii) दक मैंने/हमने अन्य िेिों में उसी/ताजत्वक रूप से समान आजवष्कार हेतु पेटेंट के जलए आवेिन दकया है, जिसका जववरण नीचे दिया गया है :

िेि का नाम आवेिन की तारीख आवेिन सं॰ आवेिन दक जस्ट्थजत प्रकािन की तारीख जनपटान की तारीख

3. समनुिेजिती का नाम और पता (i) दक भारत में िायर आवेिन(नों) में अजधकार ... को संनुिेजिक दकया गया है/ हैं।

(iii) दक मैं / हम जनयंत्रक द्वारा पेटेंट अनुिान करने की तारीख तक, मैं / हम जनयंत्रक को जलजखत रूप में भारत के बाहर पेटेंट के जलए फाइल दकए गए संगत आवेिनों के जववरणों की सूचना धारा 8 और जनयम 12 के प्रावधानों के अनुसार िेता रहाँगा/ िेते रहेंगे।

...आि तारीख ...20...
4. आवेिक या उसके प्राजधकृत रजिस्ट्रीकृत पेटेंट अजभकताध द्वारा हस्ट्ताक्षररत दकया िाए हस्ट्ताक्षर ...

5. उस प्रकृत व्यजि का नाम जिसने हस्ट्ताक्षर दकए हैं। (...).

सेवा में, पेटेंट जनयंत्रक, पेटेंट कायाधलय, पता...
रटप्पण- िो लागू न हो उसे काट िें।“;

(iii) “प्रपत्र संख्या 4” के स्ट्थान पर जनम्नजलजखत प्रपत्र रखा िाएगा, अथाधत:- प्रपत्र 4 पेटेंट अजधजनयम, 1970 (1970 का 39) और पेटेंट जनयम, 2003 समय जवस्ट्तार के जलए अनुरोध अथवा जवलंब के जलए क्षमा [धारा 53(2) और 142(4); जनयम 12(5), 13(6), 24ख(6), 24ग(11), 80(1क), 130, 131(2) और 138]
1. आवेिक का नाम मैं/हम... मेरे/हमारे आवेिन/ पेटेंट सं॰ ... के संबंध में धारा / जनयम ... के अधीन ... माह के समय-जवस्ट्तारण के जलए अनुरोध करता हाँ/ करते हैं।

अनुरोध करने के जनम्नजलजखत कारण हैं:- ...
...आि तारीख ...20...
2. आवेिक या उसके प्राजधकृत रजिस्ट्रीकृत पेटेंट अजभकताध द्वारा हस्ट्ताक्षररत दकया िाए हस्ट्ताक्षर (...)
3. उस प्रकृत व्यजि का नाम जिसने हस्ट्ताक्षर दकए हैं

सेवा में, पेटेंट जनयंत्रक, पेटेंट कायाधलय, पता...
रटप्पण : िुल्क के जलए प्रथम अनुसूची िेजखए”;

(iv) प्रारूप 8 के बाि, जनम्नजलजखत प्रपत्र रखा िाएगा, अथाधत्: - प्रपत्र 8ए पेटेंट अजधजनयम, 1970 (1970 का 39) और पेटेंट जनयम, 2003 आजवष् कार का प्रमाण पत्र [जनयम 70क िेखें]
1. आजवष्कारक का नाम, और पेटेंट संख्या। मैं... 1, पेटेंट संख्या के संबंध में आजवष्कारक...1, एतद्द्वारा पेटेंट के संबंध में 'सर्टधदफकेट ऑफ इन्वेंटरजिप 'प्रिान करने का अनुरोध। अथवा मैं... 1, पेटेंट संख्या के संबंध में आजवष्कारक...1, एतद्द्वारा पेटेंट के संबंध में इन्वेंरी के डुजप्लकेट प्रमाण पत्र के अनुिान के जलए अनुरोध। उन पररजस्ट्थजतयों को जनधाधररत करने वाला कथन जिसमें इन्वेंरी का मूल प्रमाण पत्र खो गया था, नष्ट हो गया था, क्षजतग्रस्ट्त हो गया था या उत्पादित नहीं दकया िा सकता था, इस प्रकार हैं:
...
...
...
...
...

2. आजवष्कारक द्वारा हस्ट्ताक्षररत होने के जलए और इस अनुरोध को िाजखल करने की तारीख।

हस्ट्ताक्षर (नीचे िी गई िानकारी अजनवायध रूप से प्रस्ट्तुत की िानी आवश्यक है) (हस्ट्ताक्षर करने वाले आजवष्कारक का नाम) आजवष्कारक का आधार नंबर (भारतीय आजवष्कारकों के जलए) मकान नं.
अपाटधमेंट/स्ट्रीट िहर

राज्य िेि जपन कोड मोबाइल फोन: ( टीपी सत्यापन अजनवायध-संिोजधत दकया िाएगा) ईमेल: ( टीपी सत्यापन अजनवायध-संिोजधत दकया िाएगा) ...आि तारीख ...20...

सेवा में, पेटेंट जनयंत्रक, पेटेंट कायाधलय, पता...
नोट.- यह प्रमाण पत्र, दकसी भी तरह से, पेटेंट के तहत दकसी भी अजधकार को प्रिान या कम नहीं करता है।

(v) “प्रपत्र संख्या 27 के स्ट्थान पर जनम्नजलजखत प्रारूप रखा िाएगा, अथाधत:-

“प्रपत्र 27 पेटेंट अजधजनयम, 1970 (1970 का 39) और पेटेंट जनयम, 2003

कोई िुल्क नहीं

भारत में वाजणजज्यक स्ट्तर पर पेटेंट दकए गए आजवष्कार(रों) के कायधकरण से संबंजधत जववरण [धारा 146(2) और जनयम 131 (1) िेखें]

1. नाम, पता, राष्ट्रीयता और पेटेंट संख्या (संख्याएं) भरें मैं/हम,पेटेंटधारक/लाइसेंसधारक ...पेटेंट सं.
... के सन्िभध में जववरण प्रस्ट्तुत करता हाँ/करते हैं,

(स्ट्पष्टीकरण: कई पेटेंटों के जलए एक प्रपत्र िायर दकया िा सकता है, बिते दक वे सभी पेटेंट से संबंजधत हों और एक ही पेटेंट धारक (कों) को प्रिान दकए गए हों)।
2. जविीय वषध का उल्लेख करें जिससे जववरण संबंजधत है जविीय वषध... से संबंजधत
3. कायध दकया/ नहीं दकया।

कृपया बताएं दक प्रत् येक पेटेंट, जिसके जलए यह प्रपत्र िायर दकया िा रहा है, ने कायध दकया या नहीं दकया। पेटेंट संख् या कायध दकया [यदि लागू हो तो (✓) का जनिान लगाएं] कायध नहीं दकया [यदि लागू हो तो (✓) का जनिान लगाएं]

ऊपर दिए गए तथ् य और मामले मेरे ज्ञान, िानकारी और जवश् वास के अनुसार सही हैं। ...आि तारीख ...माह ... 20...

4. यदि कायध नहीं दकया गया है, तो कृपया उजचत कारणों को जचजन्हत करें

पेटेंट, आजवष्कार जवकास/वाजणजज्यक परीक्षण के अधीन है

पेटेंट प्राप्त आजवष्कार का जवजनयामक प्राजधकाररयों के साथ समीक्षा/अनुमोिन दकया िा रहा है

वाजणजज्यक लाइसेंलसंग का जवकल्प है

कोई अन्य, जनर्िधष्ट करें।

5. क्या पेटेंट लाइसेंस के जलए उपलब्ध है

हााँ

नहीं हााँ की जस्ट्थजत में, क्या लाइसेंस प्राप्त करने के इच्छुक दकसी भी व्यजि से संपकध करने में आपको रुजच हैं। यदि हां, तो कृपया नीचे संपकध जववरण प्रिान करें:
ईमेल पता: ...
संपकध नंबर: ...

ऊपर बताए गए तथ्य और मामले मेरे ज्ञान, िानकारी और जवश्वास के अनुसार सही हैं। दिनांक ... दिन ... 20...
पेटेंटधारक(धारकों)/ लाइसेंसधारक/ जववरण प्रस्ट् तुत करने वाले प्राजधकृत एिेंट द्वारा हस्ट् ताक्षर करने के जलए हस्ट्ताक्षर ...

सेवा में, पेटेंट जनयंत्रक, पेटेंट कायाधलय, ...
रटप्पण: 1. प्रत्येक पेटेंटधारी और प्रत्येक लाइसेंसधारी (जविेष या अन्यथा) को यह प्ररूप िायर करना आवश्यक है; िहां पेटेंट िो या िो से अजधक व्यजियों को दिया िाता है, यह प्ररूप ऐसे सभी या दकसी एक व्यजि द्वारा संयुि रूप से िाजखल दकया िा सकता है।
2.
पेटेंट अजधजनयम, 1970 के तहत जनर्िधष्ट ितों के अधीन, एक पेटेंट आजवष्कार को केवल इस आधार पर 'कायध नहीं दकया गया' नहीं माना िाएगा दक पेटेंट उत्पाि भारत में आयात दकया गया है।

(vi) प्रपत्र 30 के बाि, जनम्नजलजखत प्रपत्र को प्रजतस्ट्थाजपत दकया िाएगा, अथाधत्: -

" प्रपत्र 31 पेटेंट अजधजनयम, 1970 (1970 का 39) और पेटेंट जनयम, 2003 ररयायत अवजध [धारा 31 और जनयम 29क िेखें]
1. नाम, पता, राष्ट्रीयता और आवेिन संख्या। मैं / हम, आवेिक ..., दिनांक ...
को िायर आवेिन संख्या ...
...
के संबंध में, एतिद्वारा धारा

के तहत प्रिान की गई छूट अवजध के लाभ का िावा करते हैं।

2. लागू प्रावधान
1. धारा 31(क)
2. धारा 31(ख)
3. धारा 31(ग)
4. धारा 31(घ)
3. साक्ष्य के रूप में प्रस्ट्तुत दकए िाने वाले िस्ट्तावेि। नोट: साक्ष्य के रूप में एक एफीडेजवट को भी िाजमल दकया सकता है। (i) धारा 31(क) जनम्नजलजखत के संिभध में:
क (दिन/महीने/वषध के जलए बॉक्स में ििाधने या उपयोग करने के जलए सबसे पहली तारीख; और ख (यह भी दक जडस्ट्प्ले वास्ट्तजवक और पहले इवेंट या उससे टाइटल प्राप्त करने वाले व्यजि की सहमजत से प्राप्त हुआ है ; और हां या नहीं में उिर िें। ग (यह जडस्ट्प्ले दकसी औद्योजगक या अन्य प्रििधनी में हुआ था, जिसके जलए इस धारा के प्रावधानों को केंद्र सरकार द्वारा आजधकाररक रािपत्र में

अजधसूचना द्वारा बढाया गया है;

जनम्नजलजखत िस्ट्तावेिी साक्ष्य प्रस्ट्तुत दकए गए हैं:
...
...

...
...
...

(ii) धारा 31(ख) जनम्नजलजखत के संिभध में:
क) प्रकािन या उपयोग में आने की सबसे पहली तारीख;
ख) उपयुधि धारा 31 (क) के संबंध में िस्ट्तावेिी साक्ष्य; और ग) िैसा दक धारा 31 (ख) में उजल्लजखत है इस आिय के िस्ट्तावेिी साक्ष्य दक इन्वेन्िन के दकसी भी जववरण का प्रकािन इन्वेन्िन के जडस्ट्प्ले या उपयोग के पररणामस्ट्वरूप हुआ;
जनम्नजलजखत िस्ट्तावेिी साक्ष्य प्रस्ट्तुत दकए गए हैं:
...
...
...
...
(iii) धारा 31 (ग) जनम्नजलजखत के संिभध में:
क) उपयोग में आने की पहली तारीख;
ख) िैसादक ऊपर उजल्लजखत है; धारा 31 (क) या धारा 31(ख) के संबंध में िस्ट्तावेिी साक्ष्य; और ग) धारा 31 (ग) में उजल्लजखत इन्वेन्िन के उपयोग के संबंध में िस्ट्तावेिी साक्ष्य; और घ) िस्ट्तावेिी साक्ष्य या एदफडेजवट दक इन्वेन्िन का उपयोग वास्ट्तजवक और पहले इनवेंटर या उससे टाइटल प्राप्त करने वाले व्यजि की सहमजत के जबना हुआ;
जनम्नजलजखत िस्ट्तावेिी साक्ष्य प्रस्ट्तुत दकए गए हैं:
...
...
...
...

(iv) धारा 31 (घ) जनम्नजलजखत के संिभध में:
क) जववरण या प्रकािन की सबसे पहली जतजथ;
ख) एक जवद्वत समाि के समक्ष वास्ट्तजवक और पहले इनवेंटर द्वारा पढे गए एक पेपर में इनवेंटर का जववरण;
ग) वास्ट्तजवक और पहले इनवेंटर द्वारा प्रकाजित इन्वेन्िन का जववरण या एक जवद्वत समाि के जलए लेनिेन में उसका उपयोग करने में उसकी सहमजत के साथ;
जनम्नजलजखत िस्ट्तावेिी साक्ष्य प्रस्ट्तुत दकए गए हैं:
...
...
...
...

4. वचनबद्धता यह दक मेरा इन्वेन्िन दिन/महीने/वषध से सावधिजनक डोमेन में था और यह आवेिन उस तारीख से 12 महीने के बाि नहीं दकया गया है (िैसा दक ऊपर बताया गया है धारा 31 (क), 31 (ख), 31 (ग), या 31 (घ) के संबंध में)

ऊपर बताए गए तथ्य और मामले मेरे ज्ञान, िानकारी और जवश्वास के अनुसार सही हैं। दिनांक ...
दिन

...
...

5. आवेिक/प्राजधकृत एिेंट द्वारा हस्ट्ताक्षररत दकया िाना चाजहए। नोट: िपथ पत्र, यदि कोई है तो आवेिनकताध द्वारा हस्ट्ताक्षररत होना चाजहए। हस्ट्ताक्षर...

सेवा में, पेटेंट जनयंत्रक, पेटेंट कायाधलय, ...
नोट: लागू जवकल्प का चयन करें।"

18. उक् त जनयमों में चौथी अनुसूची को जनजम्नजलजखत अनुसूची से प्रजतस्ट्थाजपत दकया िाएगा, नामत:

"चौथी अनुसूची (जनयम 136(1) का परन् तुक िेखें) प्रजवजष्ट सं.
ऐसे जवषय जिनकी बाबत लगाई िाती है। राजि (रुपये में) प्राकृजतक व्यजि (व्यजियों) या स्ट्टाटधअप (स्ट्टाटधअपों) या छोटे इकाई / (इकाईयों) या िैक्षजणक संस्ट्थान (संस्ट्थानों) अन्य (अन्यों), अकेले या प्राकृजतक व्यजि (व्यजियों) या स्ट्टाटधअप (स्ट्टाटधअप) या छोटी इकाई / (इकाईयों) या िैक्षजणक संस्ट्थान (संस्ट्थानों) के साथ
1.

धारा 25, 57, 60, 63, 78, 87(2) या 88(4) के अधीन आक्षेप की सूचना के जलए
2.

धारा 84 (1), 91 (1) या 92 (1) के अधीन अजनवायध लाइसेंस के आवेिन के जलए
3.

धारा 88(4) के अधीन अनुज्ञजप्त के जनबंधन और ितों के पुनरीक्षण के संबंध में आवेिन के जलए।
4.

जनयम 62 (2) के अधीन सुनवाई पर उपजस्ट्थत होने के आिय की सूचना के जलए
5.

िहां कोई पेटेंट अजभकताध या दकसी अन् य व् यजि की जनयुजि की गई है, वहां पॉवर ऑफ अटॉनी के जलए स्ट् टाम् प िुल्क या सुसंगत िपथ-पत्र के जलए स्ट् टाम् प िुल्क संिि वास्ट् तजवक राजि संिि वास्ट् तजवक राजि
6.

जनयम 57 के अधीन जलजखत जववरणी के जलए या जनयम 58 के अधीन उिर जववरणी या यदि सुसंगत हो, प्रत् येक िपथ-पत्र के जलए:
7.

यदि सुसंगत हो, ऐसे प्रत् येक िस्ट् तावेि या प्रकािन के जलए िो कायधवाही में प्रस्ट् तुत दकए गए
8.

प्रत् येक अनावश् यक या असंगत िपथ-पत्र या उद्धरण के जलए:

9.

जनयंत्रक के समक्ष प्रत् येक दिवस या अंिदिवस की सुनवाई के जलए:
10.

जनयम 136 का उपजनयम (2) पहली अनुसूची के प्रजवजष्ट 1, 2, 12, 27, 28, 29, िो भी लागू हो, के संबंध में वास्ट्तजवक रूप से भुगतान की गई राजि का िोड़ पहली अनुसूची की प्रजवजष्टयों 1, 2, 12, 27, 28, 29 के संबंध में वास्ट्तव में संिि राजियों के कुल योग का िुगुना, िैसा भी लागू हो।

19. उक् त जनयमों में, 5वीं अनुसूची में, िीषध के जलए, "क्र.सं.
दकस प्रावधान के तहत भुगतान दकया गया (पेटेंट जनयम, 2003 का प्रासंजगक प्रावधान, यदि कोई हो)समझौते के तहत जवजनयम के संगत जनयम वास्ट् तजवक व् यजि व्यजियों) के जलए। वास्ट् तजवक व् यजि (व् यजियों) से जभन् न या तो अकेले या अन् य वास्ट् तजवक व् यजि (व् यजियों) के साथ संयुक् त ू प में व् यजियों के जलए"।

जनम्नजलजखत को िीषध से प्रजतस्ट्थाजपत दकया िाएगा, नामत: - "क्र.
सं.
दकस प्रावधान के तहत भुगतान दकया गया (पेटेंट जनयम, 2003 का प्रासंजगक प्रावधान, यदि कोई हो) समझौते के तहत जवजनयम के संगत जनयम वास्ट् तजवक व्यजि व्यजियों) अथवा स्ट्टाटधअप (अप् स) अथवा छोटी कंपनी /(यों) अथवा िैजक्षक संस्ट्थान(नों) के जलए अन्य, अकेले या अन् य वास्ट् तजवक ् यजि (व् यजियों) के साथ अथवा स्ट्टाटधअप (अप् स) अथवा छोटी कंपनी /(यों) अथवा िैजक्षक संस्ट्थान(नों) के जलए"

[फा. सं. पी-24031/14/2023-आईपीआर-III] जहमानी पांडे, संयुक् त सजचव

नोट: उक् त जनयम 2 मई, 2003 के सां.आ. 493 (अ) द्वारा भारत के रािपत्र, असाधारण, भाग-II, खंड 3, उप-खंड (ii) में प्रकाजित दकए गए थे तथा अजधसूचना संख् या सा.का.जन. 646 (अ) तारीख 21 जसतंबर, 2021 के िररए अंजतम बार संिोधन दकए गए थे।

MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY (Department For Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade) NOTIFICATION New Delhi, the 15th March, 2024

G.S.R. 211(E).—WHEREAS the draft of certain rules, further to amend the Patents Rules, 2003 were published, as required under sub-section (3) of section 159 of the Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 1970), vide notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade) number G.S.R. 619 (E), dated the 23st August, 2023 in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, Sub-section (i) inviting objections and suggestions from all persons likely to be affected.
AND, WHEREAS, copies of the said notification were made available to the public on the 23st August, 2023;
AND, WHEREAS, the objections and suggestions received from the public in respect of the said draft rules have been duly considered by the Central Government;
NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 159 of the Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 1970), the Central Government hereby makes the following rules further to amend the Patents Rules, 2003, namely: -

1.
(1) These rules may be called the Patents (Amendment) Rules, 2024.
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.
2.
In the Patents Rules, 2003, hereinafter referred to as the said rules, in rule 12, - (i) in sub-rule (2), for the words ‘six months from the date of such filing’, the words ‘three months from the date of issuance of first statement of objections under sub-rule (3) of rule 24B or sub-rule (8) of rule 24C’ shall be substituted;
(ii) for sub-rule (3), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely: - “3. The Controller may, use accessible and available databases, for considering the information relating to applications filed in a country outside India.
4. The Controller may, under sub-section (2) of section 8, for reasons to be recorded in writing, direct the applicant to furnish a fresh statement and undertaking in Form 3 within two months from the date of such communication by the Controller.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, the Controller may condone the delay or extend the time for filing Form 3 for a period up to three months upon a request made in Form 4.”.
3.
In rule 13 after sub-rule (2) of the said rules, the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely, - “(2A) A patent applicant may, if he so desires, file one or more further applications under section 16, including in respect of an invention disclosed in the provisional or complete specification or a further application filed under section 16.”.
4.
In rule 24B of the said rules, - (a) in sub-rule (1), - (i) for the words ‘forty-eight months’, wherever they occur, the words ‘thirty-one months’ shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-rule (1), after clause (v), the following clause shall be inserted, namely, - ‘(vi) Notwithstanding anything contained in this sub-rule, in respect of an application filed before commencement of the Patents (Amendment) Rules, 2024, the period for making request for examination under sub-section (1) of section 11B shall be the period specified under this sub-rule before the commencement of the Patents (Amendment) Rules, 2024.’;
(b) in sub-rule (6), for the words, brackets and figure ‘specified under sub-rule (5)’, the words ‘specified herein’ shall be substituted.
5.
In rule 24C of the said rules, in sub-rule (11), for the words, brackets and figure ‘specified under sub-rule (10)’, the words ‘specified herein’ shall be substituted.
6.
In the said rules, after rule 29, the following rule shall be inserted, namely, -

“29A. Grace period. - An application to avail the period specified under section 31 shall be filed in Form 31, along with the fees specified in the First Schedule.”.
7.
In the said rules, in rule 55:
(A) for sub-rule (3), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely, - “(3) On consideration of the representation if the Controller is satisfied that, - (a) no prima facie case is made out in the representation, he shall notify the opponent accordingly, and - (i) unless the opponent requests to be heard in the matter, the Controller shall, within one month from the date of such notification, pass an order recording the grounds for refusal of the representation;
(ii) if opponent requests for a hearing, the Controller shall, after giving the opponent an opportunity of being heard, pass an order within one month from the date of hearing, recording his reasons for refusal or prima facie acceptance of the representation and the applicant shall be notified accordingly.
(b) a prima facie case is made out in the representation, the Controller shall, within one month of receiving the representation, pass an order recording his reasons and notify the applicant accordingly.
(B) in sub-rule (4) for the word ‘three months’, the word ‘two months’ shall be substituted;
(C) after sub-rule (5), the following sub-rules shall be inserted namely: - “(5A.) The procedure specified in sub-rules (2) to (4) of rule 62 shall, as far as may be, apply to the procedure for hearing under this rule.
(5B) An application for a patent, in which a representation for opposition has been filed and notice has been issued by the Controller under rule 3, shall be examined in accordance with rule 24C.”.
8.
In rule 56 of the said rules, in sub-rule (4), for the word ‘three months, the word ‘two months’ shall be substituted.
9.
After rule 70 of the said rules, the following rule shall be inserted, namely: - ‘70A. Certificate of inventorship. - (1) The Controller may issue a certificate of inventorship to an inventor in respect of a patent in force, on a request made by the inventor in Form-8A along with fee specified in the First Schedule.
(2) The Controller may issue a duplicate certificate of inventorship to an inventor in respect of a patent in force on a request made by the inventor in Form-8A along with the fee specified in the First Schedule and such request shall contain a statement setting out the circumstances in which the original certificate of inventorship was lost, destroyed, damaged or cannot be produced.’.
10.
In rule 80 of the said rules, for sub-rule (3), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely: - “(3) The annual renewal fees payable in respect of two or more years may be paid in advance:
Provided that where the renewal fees is paid in advance through electronic mode for a period of at least 4 years, a ten per cent reduction in fee shall be applicable for such renewal.”.
11.
In rule 110 of the said rules, in sub-rule (2): - a) for the words ‘Patents Act and Rules’, the words ‘The Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 1970), The Patents Rules, 2003, The Designs Act, 2000 (16 0f 2000) and The Designs Rules, 2001’ shall be substituted;
b) for the words ‘patent specifications’, the words ‘patent specifications, design specifications’ shall be substituted.
12.
In rule 131 of the said rules, for sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely,- “(2) The statements referred to in sub-rule (1) shall be furnished once in respect of every period of three financial year, starting from the financial year commencing immediately after the financial year in which the patent was granted, and shall be furnished within six months from the expiry of each such period.
Provided that the Controller may condone the delay or extend the time in filing of such statement for a period up to three months upon a request made in Form 4.”.

13.
Rule 137 of the said rules, shall be numbered as sub-rule (1) thereof and after sub-rule (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-rule shall be inserted namely, - “(2) The provisions contained in sub-rule (1) shall be not be applicable for matters related to- (i) extension of time or condonation of delay under sub-rule (5) of rule 12; (ii) clause (i) of sub-rule (4) and sub-rule (6) of rule 20; (iii) rule 21; (iv) sub-rules (1), (5) and (6) of rule 24B; (v) sub-rules (10) and (11) of rule 24C; (vi) sub-rule (4) of Rule 55; (vii) sub-rule (1A) of rule 80; (viii) sub-rules (1) and (2) of rule 130; (ix) sub-rule(2) of rule
131.”.
14.
For rule 138 of the said rules, the following rules shall be substituted, namely, - "138. Power to extend time specified or condone delay: - Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, the time specified for doing any act or taking any proceeding thereunder may be extended or any delay may be condoned by the Controller for a period of up to six months, upon a request made in Form 4, where such request is made before the expiry of the said period of six months:
Provided that such request may be made any number of times within the specified period of six months.’.

15. In the said rules, for Table I of THE FIRST SCHEDULE, the following table shall be substituted, namely, - TABLE I “Number of Entry On what payable Number of the relevant Form For e-filing For physical filing Natural person or startup or small entity or educational institution Other(s), alone or with natural person or startup or small entity or educational institution Natural person or startup or small entity or educational institution Other(s), alone or with natural person or startup or small entity or educational institution

Rupees Rupees Rupees Rupees
1. On application for a patent under sections 7, 54* or 135 and rule 20(1) accompanied by provisional or complete specification— Multiple of 1600 in case of every multiple priority.
Multiple of 8000 in case of every multiple priority.
Multiple of 1750 in case of every multiple priority.
Multiple of 8800 in case of every multiple priority.

(i) for each sheet of specification in addition to 30, excluding sequence listing of nucleotides and/ or amino acid sequences under sub-rule (3) of rule (9);

(i) 160 (i) 800 (i) 180 (i) 880

(ii) for each claim in addition to 10;

(ii) 320 (ii) 1600 (ii) 350 (ii) 1750

(iii) for each page of sequence listing of nucleotides and/ or amino acid sequences under subrule (3) of rule (9).

(iii) 160 subject to a maximum of 24000 (iii) 800 subject to a maximum of Not allowed Not allowed

*An application for a patent made under section 54 shall be eligible for a reduction of 50 per cent in fee as compared to other applications.

2. On filing complete specification after provisional up to 30 pages having up to 10 claims –

No fee No fee No fee No fee

(i) for each sheet of specification in addition to 30, excluding sequence listing of nucleotides and/ or amino acid sequences under sub-rule (3) of rule (9);

(i) 160 (i) 800 (i) 180 (i) 880

(ii) for each claim in addition to 10.

(ii) 320 (ii) 1600 (ii) 350 (ii) 1800

(iii) for each page of sequence listing of nucleotides and/ or amino acid sequences under subrule (3) of rule (9).

(iii) 160 subject to a maximum of 24000 (iii) 800 subject to a maximum of Not allowed Not allowed

Note: A specification in respect of an application for a patent made under section 54 shall be eligible for a reduction of 50 per cent in fee as compared to other specifications.

3. On filing a statement and undertaking under section 8.
No fee No fee No fee No fee
4. i) On request for extension of time under sections 53(2) and 142(4), rules 13(6), 80(1A) and 130 (per month).
ii) On request for extension of time or condonation of delay (per month) under sub-rule (4) of rule 12 or sub-rule (2) or rule 131.
iii) On request for extension of time under sub-rule (6) of rule 24B (per month).

iv) On request for extension of time under sub-rule (11) of rule 24C (per month).

v) On request for extension of time under rule 138 (per month).
5. On filing a declaration as to inventorship under sub-rule (6) of rule 13.
No fee No fee No fee No fee
6. On application for postdating.
-
7. On application for deletion of reference under section 19 (2).
-
8. (i) On claim under section 20(1);

(ii) On request for direction under section 20 (4) or 20 (5).

9. (i) On notice of opposition to grant of patent under section 25(2);
Not allowed Not allowed

(ii) On filing representation opposing grant of patent under section 25(1).
7A Not allowed Not allowed
10. On giving notice that hearing before Controller shall be attended under rule 62(2).
-
11. On application under section 28(2).
No fee No fee No fee No fee On application under sections 28(3) or 28(7).
12. Certificate of inventorship under rule 70A.
8A Not applicable Not applicable
13. Request for publication under section 11A(2) and rule 24A.
14. On application under section 44 for amendment of patent.
15. On application for directions under section 51(1) or 51(2).
16. On request for grant of a patent under sections 26(1) and 52(2).
17. On request for converting a patent of addition to an independent patent under section 55 (1).
-
18. For renewal of a patent under section 53—

(i) before the expiration of the 2nd year from the date of patent in respect of 3rd year;
- (ii) before the expiration of the 3rd year in respect of the 4th year;
- (iii) before the expiration of the 4th year in respect of the 5th year;
- (iv) before the expiration of the 5th year in respect of the 6th year;
- (v) before the expiration of the 6th year in respect of the 7th year;
- (vi) before the expiration of the 7th year in respect of the 8th year;
- (vii) before the expiration of the 8th year in respect of the 9th year;
- (viii) before the expiration of the 9th year in respect of the 10th year;
- (ix) before the expiration of the 10th year in respect of the 11th year;
-

(x) before the expiration of the 11th year in respect of the 12th year;
- (xi) before the expiration of the 12th year in respect of the 13th year;
- (xii) before the expiration of the 13th year in respect of the 14th year;
- (xiii) before the expiration of the 14th year in respect of the 15th year;
- (xiv) before the expiration of the 15th year in respect of the 16th year;
- (xv) before the expiration of the 16th year in respect of the 17th year;
- (xvi) before the expiration of the 17th year in respect of the 18th year;
- (xvii) before the expiration of the 18th year in respect of the 19th year;
- (xviii)before the expiration of the 19th year in respect of the 20th year.
-
19. On application for amendment of application for patent or complete specification or other related documents under section 57—

(i) before grant of patent;
(ii) after grant of patent;
(iii) where amendment is for changing name or address or nationality or address for service.
20. On notice of opposition to an application under sections 57(4), 61(1) and 87(2) or to surrender a patent under section 63(3) or to a request under section 78(5).
21. On application for restoration of a patent under section 60.
22. Additional fee for restoration under section 61(3) and rule 86(1).
—
23. On notice of offer to surrender a patent under section 63.
— No fee No fee No fee No fee
24. On application for the entry in the register of patents of the name of a person entitled (In respect of each patent) 8,000 (In respect of each patent) (In respect of each patent) 8,800 (In respect of each patent)

to a patent or as a share or as a mortgage or as licensee or as otherwise or for the entry in the register of patents of notification of a document under sections 69(1) or 69(2) and rules 90(1) or 90(2).
25. On application for alteration of an entry in the register of patents or register of patent agents under rules 94(1) or rule 118(1).
—
26. On request for entry of an additional address for service in the Register of Patents under rule 94(3).
—
27. On application for compulsory license under sections 84(1), 91(1), 92(1) and 92A.
28. On request for examination of application for patent—

(i) under section 11B and rule 24(1);

(ii) under rule 20(4)(ii).

29. On request for expedited or delayed examination of application for patent under rule 24C.
18A Not allowed Not allowed
30. Conversion of the request for examination filed under rule 24B to request for expedited or delayed examination under rule 24C.
18A Not allowed Not allowed
31. On application for revocation of a patent under section 85(1).
32. On application for revision of terms and conditions of licence under section 88(4).
33. On request for termination of compulsory licence under section 94.
34. On application for registration as a patent agent under rule 109(1) or rule
112.
Not applicable Not applicable
35. On request for appearing in the qualifying examination under rule 109(3).
— Not applicable 1750 Not applicable
36. For continuance of the name of a person in the register of patent agents—

for the 1st year to be paid along with registration;

— Not applicable Not applicable

(ii) for every year excluding the 1st year — Not applicable Not applicable

to be paid on the 1st April in each year.
37. On application for duplicate certificate of patent agent under rule 111A.
— Not applicable Not applicable
38. On application for restoration of the name of a person in the register of patent agents under rule 117(1).
(Plus continuation fee under entry number 36) Not applicable (Plus continuation fee under entry number 36) Not applicable
39. On a request for correction of clerical error under section 78(2).
—
40. On application for review or setting aside the decision or order of the controller under section 77(1)(f) or 77(1)(g).
41. On application for permission for applying patent outside India under section 39 and rule 71(1).
42. On application for duplicate patent under section 154 and rule 132.
—
43. (i) On request for certified copies under section 72 or for certificate under section 147 and rule 133(1).
— (up to 30 pages and, thereafter, 30 for each extra page) (up to 30 pages and, thereafter, 150 for each extra page) (up to 30 pages and, thereafter, 30 for each extra page) (up to 30 pages and, thereafter, 150 for each extra page)

(ii) On request for certified copies under section 72 or for certificate under section 147 and rule 133(2).
-- (up to 30 pages and thereafter, 30 for each extra page) (up to 30 pages and thereafter, 30 for each extra page) (up to 30 pages and thereafter, 30 for each extra page) (up to 30 pages and thereafter, 30 for each extra page)
44. For certifying office copies, printed each.
—
45. On request for inspection of register under section 72, inspection under rule 27 or rule 74A.
—
46. On request for information under section 153 and rule
134.
—
47. On form of authorization of a patent agent.
No fee No fee No fee No fee
48. On petition not otherwise provided for.
—
49. For supplying of photocopies of the documents, per page.
—
50. Transmittal fee for international application.
—
51. Transmittal fee for international application (for ePCT filing).
— No fee No fee Not applicable Not applicable
52. For preparation of certified copy of priority document and for transmission of the same to the International Bureau of World Intellectual — (up to 30 pages and, thereafter, 30 for each (up to 30 pages and, thereafter, 150 for each (up to 30 pages and, thereafter, 30 for each extra (up to 30 pages and, thereafter, 150 for each

Property Organization.
extra page) extra page) page) extra page)
53. For preparation of certified copy of priority document and e-transmission through WIPO DAS.
— No fee No fee Not applicable Not applicable
54. On statement regarding working of a patented invention on a commercial scale in India under section 146(2) and rule 131(1).
No fee No fee No fee No fee
55. To be submitted for claiming the status of a small entity or startup.
No fee No fee No fee No fee
56. Application for withdrawing the application under section 11B(4), and rules 7(4A) and
26.
No fee No fee No fee No fee
57. Request for adjournment of hearing under rule 129A (for each adjournment).
-
58. Miscellaneous form under rule 8(2), to be used when no other form is prescribed.
As applicable
59. Grace period.
2750”

16.
In the said rules, in THE SECOND SCHEDULE, in the LIST OF FORMS, - (i) for the entry corresponding to “Form-4”, the following entry shall be substituted, namely, - "4.
Sections 53(2) and 142(4), rules 12(5), 13(6), 24B(6), 24C(11), 80(1A), 130 and 138.
Request for extension of time or condonation of delay.”;
(ii) after the entry corresponding to “Form-8”, the following entry shall be substituted, namely, - “8A.
Rule 70A.
Certificate of inventorship.”;

(iii) after the entry corresponding to “Form-30”, the following entry shall be inserted, namely, - "31.
Section 31 and rule 29A Grace period.”.
17.
In the said rules, in THE SECOND SCHEDULE: - (i) for Form 1, the following Form shall be substituted, namely, - “FORM 1 THE PATENTS ACT 1970 (39 of 1970) and THE PATENTS RULES, 2003 APPLICATION FOR GRANT OF PATENT (See section 7, 54 and 135 and sub-rule (1) of rule 20) (FOR OFFICE USE ONLY)

Application No.

Filing date:

Amount of Fee paid:

CBR No:

Signature:

1. APPLICANT’S REFERENCE / IDENTIFICATION NO. (AS ALLOTTED BY OFFICE)

2. TYPE OF APPLICATION [Please tick ( ) at the appropriate category] Ordinary ( ) Convention ( ) PCT-NP ( ) PPH ( )

Divisional ( ) Patent of Addition () Divisional ( )( ) Patent of Addition ( )

Divisional ( ) Patent of Addition ( )

3A. APPLICANT(S) Name in Full Gender (optional, for individuals) Nationality Country of Residence Age (optional, for natural persons)) Address of the Applicant

- Male
- Female
- Others
- Prefer not to disclose

- years
- Prefer not to disclose House No.

Street

City

State

Country

Pin code

Email (OTP verification mandatory
-will be redacted)

Contact number (OTP verification mandatory
-will be redacted)

3B. CATEGORY OF APPLICANT [Please tick ( ) at the appropriate category] Natural Person ( ) Other than Natural Person ( ) Educational institution ()

Small Entity ( ) Startup ( ) Others ( )

4. INVENTOR(S) [Please tick ( ) at the appropriate category] Are all the inventor(s) same as the applicant(s) named above?
Yes ( ) No ( ) If “No”, furnish the details of the inventor(s) Name in Full Gender (optional, for natural persons) Nationality Age (optional, for natural persons) Country of Residence Address of the Inventor

- Male
- Female
- Others
- Prefer not to disclose

- years
- Prefer not to disclose

House No.

Street

City

State

Country

Pin code

5. TITLE OF THE INVENTION

6. AUTHORISED REGISTERED PATENT AGENT(S) IN/PA No.

Name

Mobile No. (OTP verification mandatory-will be redacted)

7. ADDRESS FOR SERVICE OF APPLICANT IN INDIA Name

Postal Address

Telephone No.

Mobile No. (OTP verification mandatory-will be redacted)

Fax No.

E-mail ID (OTP verification mandatory-will be redacted)

8. IN CASE OF APPLICATION CLAIMING PRIORITY OF APPLICATION FILED IN CONVENTION COUNTRY, PARTICULARS OF CONVENTION APPLICATION Country Application Number Filing date Name of the applicant Title of the invention IPC (as classified in the convention country)

9. IN CASE OF PCT NATIONAL PHASE APPLICATION, PARTICULARS OF INTERNATIONAL APPLICATION FILED UNDER PATENT CO-OPERATION TREATY (PCT) International application number International filing date

10. IN CASE OF DIVISIONAL APPLICATION FILED UNDER SECTION 16, PARTICULARS OF ORIGINAL (FIRST) APPLICATION Original (first) application No.
Date of filing of original (first) application

11. IN CASE OF PATENT OF ADDITION FILED UNDER SECTION 54, PARTICULARS OF MAIN APPLICATION OR PATENT Main application/patent No.
Date of filing of main application
12. DECLARATIONS (i) Declaration by the inventor(s) (In case the applicant is an assignee: the inventor(s) may sign herein below or the applicant may upload the assignment or enclose the assignment with this application for patent or send the assignment by post/electronic transmission duly authenticated within the prescribed period).
I/We, the above named inventor(s) is/are the true & first inventor(s) for this Invention and declare that the applicant(s) herein is/are my/our assignee or legal representative.
(a) Date (b) Signature(s) (c) Name(s)

(ii) Declaration by the applicant(s) in the convention country (In case the applicant in India is different than the applicant in the convention country: the applicant in the convention country may sign herein below or applicant in India may upload the assignment from the applicant in the convention country or enclose the said assignment with this application for patent or send the assignment by post/electronic transmission duly authenticated within the prescribed period) I/We, the applicant(s) in the convention country declare that the applicant(s) herein is/are my/our assignee or legal representative.
(a) Date

(b) Signature(s)

(c) Name(s) of the signatory (iii) Declaration by the applicant(s) I/We the applicant(s) hereby declare(s) that: - o I am/ We are in possession of the above-mentioned invention.
o The provisional/complete specification relating to the invention is filed with this application.
o The invention as disclosed in the specification uses the biological material from India and the necessary permission from the competent authority shall be submitted by me/us before the grant of patent to

me/us.
o There is no lawful ground of objection(s) to the grant of the Patent to me/us.
o I am/we are the true & first inventor(s).
o I am/we are the assignee or legal representative of true & first inventor(s).
o The application or each of the applications, particulars of which are given in Paragraph-8, was the first application in convention country/countries in respect of my/our invention(s).
o I/We claim the priority from the above mentioned application(s) filed in convention country/countries and state that no application for protection in respect of the invention had been made in a convention country before that date by me/us or by any person from which I/We derive the title.
o My/our application in India is based on international application under Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) as mentioned in Paragraph-9.
o The application is divided out of my /our application particulars of which is given in Paragraph-10 and pray that this application may be treated as deemed to have been filed on DD/MM/YYYY under section 16 of the Act.
o The said invention is an improvement in or modification of the invention particulars of which are given in Paragraph-11.
13. FOLLOWING ARE THE ATTACHMENTS WITH THE APPLICATION (a) Form 2 Item Details Fee Remarks Complete/ provisional specification)# No. of pages

No. of Claim(s) No. of claims and No. of pages

Abstract No. of pages

No. of Drawing(s) No. of drawings and No. of pages

# In case of a complete specification, if the applicant desires to adopt the drawings filed with his provisional specification as the drawings or part of the drawings for the complete specification under rule 13(4), the number of such pages filed with the provisional specification are required to be mentioned here.
(b) Complete specification (in conformation with the international application)/as amended before the International Preliminary Examination Authority (IPEA), as applicable (2 copies).
(c) Sequence listing in electronic form (d) Drawings (in conformation with the international application)/as amended before the International Preliminary Examination Authority (IPEA), as applicable (2 copies).
(e) Priority document(s) or a request to retrieve the priority document(s) from DAS (Digital Access Service) if the applicant had already requested the office of first filing to make the priority document(s) available to DAS.
(f) Translation of priority document/Specification/International Search Report/International Preliminary Report on Patentability.
(g) Statement and Undertaking on Form 3 (h) Declaration of Inventorship on Form 5 (i) Power of Authority (j)...

Total fee ₹...in Cash/ Banker's Cheque /Bank Draft bearing No...
Date...on ...

Bank.

I/We hereby declare that to the best of my/our knowledge, information and belief the fact and matters slated herein are correct and I/We request that a patent may be granted to me/us for the said invention.

Dated this...day of...20...

Signature:

Name:
To, The Controller of Patents The Patent Office, at...

Note: -
* Repeat boxes in case of more than one entry.
* To be signed by the applicant(s) or by authorized registered patent agent otherwise where mentioned.
* Tick ()/cross (x) whichever is applicable/not applicable in declaration in paragraph-12.
* Name of the inventor and applicant should be given in full, family name in the beginning.
* Strike out the portion which is/are not applicable.
* For fee: See First Schedule.”;

(ii) for Form 3, the following Form shall be substituted, namely, - “FORM 3 THE PATENTS ACT, 1970 (39 of 1970) and THE PATENTS RULES, 2003 STATEMENT AND UNDERTAKING UNDER SECTION 8 (See sub-rule (2) and (3) of Rule 12)
1. Name of the applicant(s).
I/We...
...
...
...
hereby declare:
2. Name, address and nationality of the joint applicant.
(i) that I/We who have made the application for patent number ...
in India, dated ..., alone/jointly with ..., (ii) that I/We have not made any application for the same/substantially the same invention outside India Or (iii) that I/We have made for the same/ substantially same invention, application(s) for patent in the other countries, the particulars of which are given below:
Name of the country Date of application Application No.
Status of the application Date of publication Date of disposal

3. Name and address of the assignee (i) that the rights in the application(s) filed in India has/have been

assigned to ...
...
...
(ii) that I/We undertake that upto the date of grant of the patent by the Controller, I/We would keep him informed in writing regarding the details of corresponding applications for patents filed outside India in accordance with the provisions contained in section 8 and rule 12.
Dated this...day of...20...
4. To be signed by the applicant or his authorized registered patent agent.
Signature. ...
5. Name of the natural person who has signed.
(...).

To The Controller of Patents, The Patent Office, at...
Note. - Strike out whichever is not applicable;”;

(iii) for Form 4, the following Form shall be substituted, namely, - FORM 4 THE PATENTS ACT, 1970 (39 of 1970) and THE PATENTS RULES, 2003 REQUEST FOR EXTENSION OF TIME OR CONDONATION OF DELAY [See sections 53(2), and 142 (4); rules 12(5), 13(6), 24B(6), 24C(11), 80(1A), 130, 131(2) and 138]
1. Name of the applicant I/We...
...
... hereby request for extension of time for ... months(s) under section/rule...in connection with my/our/application/Patent No...
The reasons for making the request are as follows:- ...
...
Dated this...day of ...20...
2. To be signed by the applicant or his authorized registered patent agent Signature (...)

3. Name of the natural person who has signed

To The Controller of Patents, The Patent Office, at...
Note. - For fee: See First Schedule.”;

(iv) after Form 8, the following Form shall be substituted, namely, -

FORM 8A THE PATENTS ACT, 1970 (39 of 1970) and THE PATENTS RULES, 2003 Certificate of Inventorship [See rule 70A]
1. Name of the Inventor, and Patent Number.
I...
...1, Inventor in respect of Patent Number...1, hereby request for the grant of a ‘Certificate of Inventorship’ in respect of the Patent.
OR I...
...1, Inventor in respect of Patent Number...1, hereby request for the grant of a duplicate certificate of inventorship in respect of the Patent. The statement setting out the circumstances in which the original certificate of inventorship was lost, destroyed, damaged or cannot be produced are as follows:
...
...
...
...
...

2. To be signed by the inventor and the date of filing of this request.

Signature2 (BELOW INFORMATION IS MANDATORILY REQUIRED TO BE SUBMITTED) (Name of the Inventor who has signed) Aadhaar number of the Inventor (for indian inventors) House No.
Apartment/Street City State Country Pin Code Mobile Phone: (OTP verification mandatory-will be redacted) Email: (OTP verification mandatory-will be redacted) Dated this...day of ...20...2

To The Controller of Patents, The Patent Office, at...
Note.- This Certificate does not, in any manner whatsoever, confer or derogate from any rights under the patent.”;

(v) for Form 27, the following Form shall be substituted, namely, -

“FORM 27 THE PATENTS ACT, 1970 (39 of 1970) AND THE PATENTS RULES, 2003 No Fee STATEMENT REGARDING THE WORKING OF PATENTED INVENTION(S) ON A COMMERCIAL SCALE IN INDIA [See section 146(2) and rule 131(1)]
1. Insert name, address, nationality, patent number(s).
I/ We, the Patentee(s)/ Licensee ..., in respect of patent number(s) ..., furnish this statement, (Explanation: One form may be filed in respect of multiple patents, provided all of them are related patents and are granted to the same patentee(s)).
2. State the financial year to which the statement relates.
in respect of the financial year ...
3. Worked / not worked.
Please state whether each patent in respect of which this form is being filed is worked or not worked.
Patent Number(s) Worked [Tick () if applicable] Not worked [ Tick () if applicable]

4. If not worked, please tick the appropriate reasons Patented Invention is under development/ commercial trial Patented Invention is under Review/approval with Regulatory authorities Exploring commercial licensing Any other, may specify:

5. Whether the patent is available for licensing YES NO In case of YES, would you be interested in receiving communications from any person interested in seeking a license. If so, kindly provide contact details as below:
Email address: ...
Contact Number: ...

The facts and matters stated above are true to the best of my/ our knowledge, information and belief.
Dated this ... day of ... 20...
6. To be signed by Patentee(s) / Licensee / Authorised Agent furnishing the statement.
Signature(s) ...

To The Controller of Patents, The Patent Office, at ...

Note: 1. Every patentee and every licensee (exclusive or otherwise) is required to file this Form; where a patent is granted to two or more persons, this form may be filed jointly by all or any of such persons.
2. Subject to conditions specified under the Patent Act, 1970 a patented invention shall not be considered as ‘not worked’ merely on the ground that the patented product has been imported in India.”.
(vi) after Form 30, the following Form shall be substituted, namely:- “FORM 31 THE PATENTS ACT, 1970 (39 of 1970) AND THE PATENTS RULES, 2003 GRACE PERIOD [See section 31 and rule 29A]
1. Name, address, nationality, and application number.
I/ We, the applicant ..., in respect of application number ..., filed on ... hereby claim the benefit of grace period provided under section 31.
2. Applicable provision Section 31(a) Section 31(b) Section 31(c) Section 31(d)
3. Documents to be submitted as evidence.
Note: Evidence may also include an affidavit.

(i) Section 31(a) With reference to:
a) the earliest date of display or use BOX FOR DDMMYYYY;
and b) that the display occurred with the consent of the true and first inventor or a person deriving title from him; and YES NO c) that the display occurred at an industrial or other exhibition to which the provisions of this section have been extended by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette;
the following documentary evidence is submitted:
...
...
...
...
(ii) Section 31(b) With reference to:
a) the earliest date of publication or use;
b) the documentary evidence in respect of section 31(a) above;
and c) the documentary evidence to the effect that the publication of any description of the invention occurred in consequence of the display or use of the invention as stated in section 31(b);
the following documentary evidence is submitted:
...
...
...
...
(iii) Section 31(c) With reference to:
a) the earliest date of use;
b) the documentary evidence in respect of section 31(a) or section 31(b) as mentioned above; and

c) the documentary evidence regarding use of the invention as stated in section 31(c); and d) the documentary evidence or affidavit that the use of the invention occurred without the consent of the true and first inventor or a person deriving title from him;
the following documentary evidence is submitted:
...
...
...
...
(iv) Section 31(d) With reference to:
a) the earliest date of description or publication;
b) the description of the invention in a paper read by the true and first inventor before a learned society;
c) the description of the invention published by the true and first inventor or with his consent in the transactions of a learned society;
the following documentary evidence is submitted:
...
...
...
...
4. Undertaking That my invention was in the public domain from DDMMYYYY and this application is made not later than 12 months from that date (earliest date as stated above in respect of section 31(a), 31(b), 31(c), or 31(d)).

The facts and matters stated above are true to the best of my/ our knowledge, information and belief.
Dated this ... day of ... 20...
5. To be signed by Applicant / Authorised Agent.
Note: Affidavit, if any, shall be signed by the applicant.
Signature(s) ...

To The Controller of Patents, The Patent Office, at ...
Note: Select the options that are applicable.”.

18.
In the said rules, for THE FOURTH SCHEDULE, the following Schedule shall be substituted, namely,- “THE FOURTH SCHEDULE [See proviso to rule 136(1)] Number of Entry Matter in respect of which cost to be awarded Amount ( in rupees) Natural person(s) or Startup(s) or Small entit(y)/ (ies) or educational institution(s) Other(s), alone or with natural person(s) or Startup(s) or Small entit(y)/ (ies) or educational institution(s)
1.
For notice of opposition under sections 25, 57, 60, 63, 78, 87(2) or 88(4).
2.
For application for compulsory licence under sections 84(1), 91(1)

or 92(1).
3.
For application for revision of terms and conditions of licence under section 88(4) .
4.
For notice of intention to attend the hearing under rule 62(2).
5.
Stamp fee for power of attorney where a patent agent or other person has been appointed or stamp fee in respect of relevant affidavits.
The amount actually paid.
The amount actually paid.
6.
For written statement under rule 57 or reply statement under rule 58 or for each affidavit, if relevant.
7.
For each document of publication produced in the proceedings, if relevant.
8.
For each unnecessary or irrelevant affidavit or citation.
9.
For every day or part day of hearing before the Controller.
10.
Sub-rule (2) of rule 136 Aggregate of amounts actually paid in respect of entries 1, 2, 12, 27, 28, 29 of the First Schedule, as may be applicable Twice the aggregate of amounts actually paid in respect of entries 1, 2, 12, 27, 28, 29 of the First Schedule, as may be applicable”.

19.
In the said rules, in the FIFTH SCHEDULE, for the headings, “Sl.
No.
On what payable (Relevant provision of Patents Rules, 2003, if any) Relevant Rule of regulations under the Treaty For Natural Person Other than natural person either alone or jointly with natural person”, the following headings shall be substituted, namely: - “S.
No.
On what payable (Relevant provision of Patents Rules, 2003, if any) Relevant Rule of regulations under the Treaty Natural person(s) or Startup(s) or Small entit(y)/ (ies) or educational institution(s) Other(s), alone or with natural person(s) or Startup(s) or Small entit(y)/ (ies) or educational institution(s)”.

[ F. No. P-24031/14/2023-IPR-III] HIMANI PANDE Jt. Secy.

Note: The said rules were published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part-II, Section 3, Sub-Section (ii), vide number S.O. 493 (E) dated the 2nd May, 2003 and last amended, vide notification number G.S.R. 646 (E) dated the 21st September, 2021.

Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. MANOJ KUMAR VERMA Digitally signed by MANOJ KUMAR VERMA Date: 2024.03.15 23:06:12 +05'30'


================================================================================
SOURCE: The Biological Diversity Act, 2002..pdf
================================================================================

6946 GI/2024 (1) रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल.- 33004/99 REGD. No. D. L.-33004/99

xxxGIDHxxx xxxGIDExxx असाधारण EXTRAORDINARY भाग II—खण् ड 3—उप-खण् ड (i) PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (i) प्राजधकार से प्रकाजित
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY

पर्ाावरण, वन और िलवार्ु पररवतान मंत्रालर् अधिसूचना नई दिल् ली, 22 अक् तूबर,

सा.का.जन. 665(अ).—केन्द्रीर् सरकार िैव जवजवधता अजधजनर्म, 2002 (2003 का 18) की धारा 62 द्वारा प्रित्त िजिर्ों का प्रर्ोग करते हुए तथा िैव जवजवधता जनर्म, 2004 को, उन बातों के जसवाए जिन्द् हें ऐसे अजधक्रमण से पूवा दकर्ा गर्ा है र्ा करने का लोप दकर्ा गर्ा है जनम्नजलजखत जनर्म बनाती है, अथाात:-
1. संजिप्त नाम और प्रारंभ.- (1) इन जनर्मों का संजिप् त नाम िैव जवजवधता जनर्म, 2024 है।

(2) र्े रािपत्र में अजधसूचना की तारीख से साठ दिन की समाजप्त पर प्रवृत् त होंगे।
2. पररभाषाएं.- (1) इन जनर्मों में, िब तक दक संिभा से अन्द्र्था अपेजित न हो, - (क) “अजधजनर्म” से िैव जवजवधता अजधजनर्म, 2002 (2003 का 18) अजभप्रेत है;
(ख) ‘’प्राजधकरण’’ से अजधजनर्म की धारा 8 की उपधारा (1) के अधीन स्ट्थाजपत राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण अजभप्रेत है;
सं. 607] नई दिल्ली, िुक्रवार, अक् तूबर 25, 2024/कार्ताक 3, 1946

No. 607] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, OCTOBER 25, 2024/KARTIKA 3, 1946

सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-25102024-258244 CG-DL-E-25102024-258244

(ग) "न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क अजधकारी" से अजधजनर्म की धारा 55क के अधीन जनर्ुि दकसी अजधकारी अजभप्रेत है;
(घ) ‘’िैव-जवजवधता प्रबंधन सजमजत’’ से अजधजनर्म की धारा 41 की उपधारा (1) अधीन स्ट्थाजपत िैव जवजवधता प्रबंधन सजमजत अजभप्रेत है;
(ङ) “अध्र्ि” से प्राजधकरण के अध्र्ि अजभप्रेत है;
(च) "िुल्क" से इन जनर्मों की प्रथम अनुसूची में जनर्िाष्ट कोई िुल्क अजभप्रेत है;
(छ) ‘’प्रपत्र’’ से इन जनर्मों की िूसरी अनुसूची के अंतगात जनर्िाष्ट प्रपत्र अजभप्रेत है;
(ि) “सिस्ट्र्” से प्राजधकरण का सिस्ट्र् अजभप्रेत है और इसमें अध्र्ि तथा सिस्ट्र् सजचव सजममजलत हैं;
(झ) "सिस्ट्र्-सजचव" से, र्थाजस्ट्थजत प्राजधकरण र्ा राज्र् िैव जवजवधता बोडा र्ा संघ राज्र् िेत्र िैव जवजवधता पररषि के पूणाकाजलक सजचव अजभप्रेत है। (2) उन िब् िों और पिों का, िो इसमें प्रर्ुक् त है, और पररभाजषत नहीं है ककंतु अजधजनर्म में पररभाजषत है, वही अथा होंगें िो उस अजधजनर्म में है।
3. अध्र्ि के चर्न और जनर्ुजि की रीजत.- (1) अध्र्ि की जनर्ुजि केन्द्रीर् सरकार द्वारा की िाएगी। (2) उप-जनर्म (1) के अधीन अध्र्ि की प्रत्र्ेक जनर्ुजि र्ा तो प्रजतजनर्ुजि के आधार पर, जिसके अधीन अल्पकाजलक संजविा भी है, र्ा सरकार के बाहर से चर्न द्वारा की िाएगी और र्दि जनर्ुजि सरकार से प्रजतजनर्ुजि र्ा अल्पकाजलक संजविा के माध्र्म से हो तो आवेिक भारत सरकार के अपर सजचव के पि से नीचे का नहीं होगा ।
4. अध्र्ि की पिावजध.- (1) अध्र्ि, जनर्ुजि के प्रकािन की तारीख से तीन वषा की अवजध तक पि धारण करेगा और पुनर्नार्ुजि का पात्र होगा। परन्द्तु कोई भी अध्र्ि, पैंसठ वषा की आर्ु प्राप्त कर लेने के पश्चात् र्ा उसकी पिावजध समाप्त हो िाने के पश्चात्, िो भी पहले हो, पि धारण नहीं करेगा। (2) अध्र्ि केन्द्रीर् सरकार को जलजखत में एक माह का नोरिस िेकर अपने पि से त्र्ागपत्र िे सकेगा।
5. वेतन और भत्ते.- (1) अध्र्ि भारत सरकार के सजचव के समतुल्र् वेतन का हकिार होगा । (2) र्दि दकसी सेवाजनवृत्त व्यजि को अध्र्ि जनर्ुि दकर्ा िाता है तो वेतन ऐसे व्यजिर्ों पर लागू केन्द्रीर् सरकार के जवद्यमान आिेिों के अनुसार जनधााररत दकर्ा िाएगा। (3) अध्र्ि ऐसे भत्ते, छुट्टी, पेंिन, भजवष्र् जनजध, जचदकत्सा सुजवधाएं, दकरार्ा मुि आवास र्ा मकान दकरार्ा भत्ता, अन्द्र् सुजवधाओं का हकिार होगा, िो समकि रैंक के केंरीर् सरकार के अजधकाररर्ों को स्ट्वीकार्ा हैं ।
6. गैर-सरकारी सिस्ट्र्ों की पिावजध और भत्ते.- (1) प्रत्र्ेक गैर-सरकारी सिस्ट्र्, रािपत्र में ऐसे सिस्ट्र् की जनर्ुजि के प्रकािन की तारीख से तीन वषा से अजधक की अवजध के जलए पि धारण करेगा । (2) प्राजधकरण की बैठक में उपजस्ट्थत होने वाला प्रत्र्ेक गैर-सरकारी सिस्ट्र् बैठक भत्ता, र्ात्रा व्यर्, िैजनक भत्ता तथा ऐसे अन्द्र् भत्तों का हकिार होगा, िो केन्द्रीर् सरकार के आर्ोगों तथा सजमजतर्ों की बैठकों में उपजस्ट्थत होने वाले गैर-सरकारी सिस्ट्र्ों पर लागू होते हैं ।

7. गैर-सरकारी सिस्ट्र्ों की ररजिर्ों को भरना.- (1) कोई भी गैर-सरकारी सिस्ट्र्, अध्र्ि को सूजचत करते हुए, केन्द्रीर् सरकार को एक माह का जलजखत नोरिस िेकर दकसी भी समर् अपने पि से त्र्ागपत्र िे सकेगा। (2) केन्द्रीर् सरकार द्वारा त्र्ागपत्र स्ट्वीकार कर जलए िाने पर र्ा नोरिस की अवजध समाप्त हो िाने पर प्राजधकरण में उस सिस्ट्र् का स्ट्थान ररि हो िाएगा । (3) दकसी गैर-सरकारी सिस्ट्र् की आकजस्ट्मक ररजि नए नामांकन द्वारा भरी िाएगी और ररजि को भरने के जलए नाजमत व्यजि केवल उस सिस्ट्र् की िेष अवजध के जलए पि धारण करेगा जिसके स्ट्थान पर ऐसा सिस्ट्र् नाजमत दकर्ा गर्ा था।
8. सिस्ट्र्ों को हिार्ा िाना.- दकसी भी सिस्ट्र् को अजधजनर्म की धारा 11 में जनर्िाष्ट दकसी भी आधार पर, केन्द्रीर् सरकार द्वारा की गई िांच के जबना तथा ऐसे सिस्ट्र् को सुनवाई का उजचत अवसर दिए जबना, पि से नहीं हिार्ा िाएगा।
9. सिस्ट्र्-सजचव.- (1) केन्द्रीर् सरकार, प्राजधकरण के जलए एक सिस्ट्र्-सजचव की जनर्ुजि करेगी। (2) सिस्ट्र्-सजचव, भारत सरकार के संर्ुि सजचव के समतुल्र् वेतन पाने का हकिार होगा। (3) सिस्ट्र्-सजचव की जनर्ुजि की जनबंधन और ितें केन्द्रीर् सरकार द्वारा अवधाररत दकए िाएंगे। (4) सिस्ट्र्-सजचव प्राजधकरण की बैठकें बुलाने, प्राजधकरण की कार्ावाजहर्ों के अजभलेखों के रखरखाव तथा ऐसे अन्द्र् मामलों के जलए उत्तरिार्ी होगा, िो उसे प्राजधकरण र्ा अध्र्ि द्वारा सौंपे िाएं। (5) सिस्ट्र्-सजचव प्राजधकरण के सभी कागिातों और अजभलेखों का प्रभारी होगा तथा उनकी सुरजित अजभरिा के जलए उत्तरिार्ी होगा। (6) प्राजधकरण द्वारा िारी सभी जनिेि, संकल्प, आिेि और अनुिेि साधारणतर्ा सिस्ट्र्-सजचव र्ा अध्र्ि द्वारा इस जनजमत्त प्राजधकृत दकसी अन्द्र् अजधकारी की मुहर और हस्ट्तािर से िारी दकए िाएंगे।
10. प्राजधकरण की बैठकें.- (1) प्राजधकरण की बैठक वषा में तीन माह में कम से कम एक बार प्राजधकरण के मुख्र्ालर् में र्ा ऐसे स्ट्थान पर होगी, िैसा अध्र्ि द्वारा जवजनजश्चत दकर्ा िाए। (2) अध्र्ि, प्राजधकरण के कम से कम छह सिस्ट्र्ों के जलजखत अनुरोध पर र्ा केन्द्रीर् सरकार के जनिेि पर, प्राजधकरण की जविेष बैठक बुलाएगा। (3) सिस्ट्र्ों को साधारण बैठक आर्ोजित करने के जलए कम से कम पंरह दिन पहले तथा जविेष बैठक आर्ोजित करने के जलए कम से कम तीन दिन पहले सूचना िी िाएगी, जिसमें बैठक आर्ोजित करने का उद्देश्र्, समर् और स्ट्थान जनर्िाष्ट दकर्ा िाएगा:

परंतु अध्र्ि, अत्र्ावश्र्क मामलों पर जवचार करने और जनणार् लेने के जलए सिस्ट्र्ों को अल्प सूचना िेकर प्राजधकरण की आपातकालीन बैठक बुलाने को प्राजधकृत कर सकेगा। (4) प्रत्र्ेक बैठक की अध्र्िता अध्र्ि द्वारा की िाएगी तथा अध्र्ि की अनुपजस्ट्थजत में, उपजस्ट्थत सिस्ट्र्ों में से सिस्ट्र्-सजचव की उपजस्ट्थजत में जनवााजचत पीठासीन अजधकारी द्वारा की िाएगी। (5) र्दि आवश्र्क हो तो प्राजधकरण की बैठक में जवजनश् चर् उपजस्ट्थत और मतिान करने वाले सिस्ट्र्ों के साधारण बहुमत द्वारा जलए िाएंगे तथा अध्र्ि र्ा अध्र्ि की अनुपजस्ट्थजत में अध्र्िता करने वाले सिस्ट्र् को जद्वतीर् र्ा जनणाार्क मत िेने का अजधकार होगा। (6) सिस्ट्र्-सजचव सजहत प्रत्र्ेक सिस्ट्र् के पास एक वोि होगा ।

(7) प्राजधकरण की प्रत्र्ेक बैठक में गणपूर्ता सात सिस्ट्र्ों की होगी। (8) बैठक में कोई सिस्ट् र् प्राजधकरण के सिस्ट् र् जवचाराथा कोई मामला लाने का हकिार होगा जिसके जलए उसने िस दिन की सूचना िी हो र्ा अध्र्ि अपने जववेकानुसार ऐसा करने की अनुमजत िे। (9) प्राजधकरण के सिस्ट्र्-सजचव द्वारा सिस्ट्र्ों को बैठक की सूचना इलेक्रॉजनक रूप से र्ा ऐसे अन्द्र् तरीके से िी िा सकेगी, िैसा मामले की पररजस्ट्थजतर्ों में उजचत समझा िाए।
11. प्राजधकरण के साधारण कार्ा .- प्राजधकरण,- (क) राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता कोष के प्रिासन का कार्ा कर सकेगा;
(ख) जवजिष्ट प्रर्ोिनों के जलए राज्र् िैव जवजवधता बोडों र्ा संघ राज्र् िेत्र िैव जवजवधता पररषिों और िैव जवजवधता प्रबंधन सजमजतर्ों को अनुिान स्ट्वीकृत कर सकेगा;
(ग) प्राजधकरण के अनुमोिन को सजममजलत करते हुए पिों के बीच जनष्पादित दकए िाने वाले जवजभन्न समझौतों की पारस्ट्पररक रूप से सहमत ितों के प्रारूप और जवषर्-वस्ट्तु पर जवजनश् चर् कर सकेगा;
(घ) अजधजनर्म के उपबंधों को लागू करने के जलए राज्र् िैव जवजवधता बोडों र्ा संघ राज् र्िेत्र िैव जवजवधता पररषिों को तकनीकी और जवजधक सलाह, स्ट्पष्टीकरण और मागाििान प्रिान कर सकेगा;
(ङ) राज्र् िैव जवजवधता बोडों और संघ राज्र् िेत्र िैव जवजवधता पररषिों के दक्रर्ाकलापों का समन्द्वर् करेगा;
(च) िन िैव जवजवधता रजिस्ट्िर के इलेक्रॉजनक और/र्ा मैनुअल प्रारूपों को जनर्िाष्ट करेगा तथा िैव जवजवधता से संबंजधत सूचना के िस्ट्तावेिीकरण, इसके आवजधक अद्यतनीकरण, इसे इलेक्रॉजनक र्ा सावािजनक रूप से सुरजित रूप से बनाए रखते हुए और जडजििल फॉमा भरने और ऐसी िानकारी साझा करने के जलए प्रदक्रर्ा जनधााररत करेगा;
(छ) दकसी दिए गए भौगोजलक िेत्र में िन िैव जवजवधता रजिस्ट्िर के माध्र्म से िैजवक संसाधनों और उनसे संबंजधत पारंपररक ज्ञान के जलए डेिाबेस और प्रलेखन प्रणाली जवकजसत करेगा;
(ि) िैव जवजवधता रजिस्ट्िरों की तैर्ारी, वैधीकरण और रखरखाव के जलए, र्दि अपेजित हो तो, राज्र् िैव जवजवधता बोडा र्ा संघ राज्र् िेत्र िैव जवजवधता पररषि के माध्र्म से र्ा सीधे िैव जवजवधता प्रबंधन सजमजतर्ों को मागाििान और तकनीकी सहार्ता प्रिान करेगा;
(झ) प्राजधकरण के कृत् र्ों और अजधजनर्म के कार्ाान्द्वर्न के बारे में केंरीर् सरकार को ररपोिा िे सकेगा;
(ञ) अजधजनर्म के कार्ाान्द्वर्न के संबंध में दकसी िेत्र का जनरीिण कर सकेगा तथा िस्ट्तावेिों की िांच करेगा;
(ि) िैव जवजवधता से संबंजधत तकनीकी और सांजख्र्कीर् डेिा, मैनुअल, कोड र्ा मागािर्िाकाओं को एकजत्रत, संकजलत और प्रकाजित करेगा, जिसमें संरिण, इसके घिकों का सतत उपर्ोग, तथा िैजवक संसाधनों और उससे संबंजधत ज्ञान के उपर्ोग से उत्पन्न लाभों को उजचत और न्द्र्ार्संगत रूप में साझा करेगा;
(ठ) अजधजनर्म के उद्देश्र्ों को प्राप्त करने के जलए अध्र्र्न, अनुसंधान, िांच, पररर्ोिनाएं, कार्ािालाएं, सेजमनार, सममेलन आदि प्रार्ोजित कर सकेगा;

(ड) अजधजनर्म के उद्देश्र्ों को प्राप्त करने के जलए संबंजधत जवभागों और िैिजणक, वैज्ञाजनक और अनुसंधान संस्ट्थानों सजहत सभी जहतधारकों के जलए िागरूकता पैिा करेगा और प्रजििण और िमता जनमााण कार्ाक्रम आर्ोजित करेगा;
(ढ) वार्षाक बिि तैर्ार करेगा, उजचत लेखे और अन्द्र् सुसंगत अजभलेख रखेगा तथा ऐसे प्ररूप में वार्षाक लेखा जववरण तैर्ार करेगा, िैसा दक केन्द्रीर् सरकार द्वारा जवजहत दकर्ा िाए;
(ण) प्राजधकरण के पिाजधकाररर्ों की भती और सेवा की ितों को जनर्ंजत्रत करने वाले जवजनर्म बना सकेगा;
(त) प्राजधकरण को उसके कार्ों के प्रभावी जनवाहन में सहार्ता प्रिान करने के जलए, तीन वषा से अजधक की जवजिष्ट अवजध के जलए परामिािाताओं और सलाहकारों को जनर्ुि कर सकेगा:

परंतु, र्दि तीन वषा की अवजध से अजधक के जलए दकसी परामिािाता र्ा सलाहकार को जनर्ुि करना आवश्र्क और समीचीन हो तो प्राजधकरण केन्द्रीर् सरकार का पूवा अनुमोिन प्राप्त करेगा। (थ) प्राजधकरण द्वारा कार्ों के प्रभावी जनवाहन के जलए पिों के सृिन, भती जनर्मों के आवजधक संिोधन, वेतन और भत्ते तथा सेवा की ितों के संबंध में केन्द्रीर् सरकार को जसफाररि कर सकेगा;
(ि) आनुवंजिक संसाधनों तक पहुंच और िैव जवजवधता पर कन्द्वेंिन के जलए उनके उपर्ोग से उत्पन्न लाभों के जनष्पि और न्द्र्ार्संगत बंिवारे पर नागोर्ा प्रोिोकॉल के प्रर्ोिनों के जलए एक सिम राष्ट्रीर् प्राजधकरण के रूप में कार्ा करेगा;
(ध) केन्द्रीर् सरकार द्वारा जनर्िाष्ट राज्र् िैव जवजवधता बोडों और संघ राज्र् िेत्र िैव जवजवधता पररषिों के जववािों का न्द्र्ार्जनणार्न कर सकेगा;
(न) राज्र् िैव जवजवधता बोडों र्ा संघ राज्र् िेत्र िैव जवजवधता पररषिों द्वारा िैव जवजवधता प्रबंधन सजमजतर्ों के जववािों के जनपिारे के जलए आििा दििा-जनिेि जनधााररत करेगा;
(प) राज्र् िैव जवजवधता बोडों, संघ राज्र् िेत्र िैव जवजवधता पररषिों, राष्ट्रीर् औषधीर् पािप बोडा, र्ा दकसी अन्द्र् प्राजधकरण के परामिा से, िैसा उजचत समझा िाए, अजधजनर्म की धारा 7 की उपधारा (1) के अधीन खेती दकए िाने वाले औषधीर् पौधों की उत्पजत्त का प्रमाण पत्र प्रस्ट्तुत करने पर छूि प्राप्त करने के जलए प्रदक्रर्ाएं जवकजसत कर सकेगा। (फ) िैव जवजवधता जवरासत स्ट्थलों के रूप में अजधसूजचत िैव जवजवधता महत्व के िेत्रों के संरिण और प्रबंधन के जलए राज्र् सरकार/संघ राज्र् िेत्र प्रिासन द्वारा जनर्म तैर्ार करने हेतु दििा-जनिेि सुझाएगा;
(ब) िैव जवजवधता प्रबंधन सजमजतर्ों द्वारा अपने अजधकार िेत्र से िैजवक संसाधनों तक पहुंच के जलए िुल्क संग्रह हेतु मॉडल दििा-जनिेि तैर्ार करेगा;
(भ) िब कभी आवश्र्क हो, िैव जवजवधता प्रबंधन सजमजतर्ों को िैजवक संसाधनों और उनसे संबद्ध पारंपररक ज्ञान तक पहुंच के जलए स्ट्थानीर् समुिार्ों द्वारा पूवा सूजचत सहमजत प्रिान करने में सुजवधा प्रिान करेगा;
(म) अजधजनर्म के अधीन अपने जवजभन्न कार्ों के जनवाहन के जलए पारििी और िवाबिेह रीजत से एक ऑनलाइन सूचना प्रौद्योजगकी पोिाल जवकजसत कर सकेगा।

12. अध्र्ि की िजिर्ां और कताव्य.- (1) अध्र्ि का प्राजधकरण के दिन-प्रजतदिन के दक्रर्ाकलापों पर समग्र जनर्ंत्रण होगा। (2) अध्र्ि को प्राजधकरण के पिाजधकाररर्ों पर साधारण अधीिण तथा प्राजधकरण के कार्ों के संचालन और प्रबंधन के जलए आवश्र्क जनिेि िारी करने की िजिर्ां होंगी। (3) अध्र्ि, सीधे तौर पर र्ा सिस्ट्र्-सजचव र्ा इस प्रर्ोिन के जलए प्राजधकृत प्राजधकरण के दकसी अन्द्र् अजधकारी के माध्र्म से, अनुमोदित बिि के समि सभी भुगतान स्ट्वीकृत और संजवतररत कर सकेगा। (4) अध्र्ि को सभी प्रस्ट्तावों पर प्रिासजनक, जवत्तीर् और तकनीकी स्ट्वीकृजतर्ां प्रिान करने की िजिर्ां होंगी। (5) प्राजधकरण अजधजनर्म पर धारा 16 के अधीन अपनी कोई भी िजि सिस्ट्र्-सजचव को र्ा प्राजधकरण के दकसी अजधकारी को, िो भारत सरकार में अनुभाग अजधकारी से कम रैंक का न हो, प्रत्र्ार्ोजित कर सकेगा। (6) अध्र्ि प्राजधकरण द्वारा जलए गए सभी जवजनश् चर्ों को उजचत रीजत से दक्रर्ाजन्द्वत करने के जलए सभी आवश्र्क उपार् करेगा। (7) महामारी और वैजिक महामारी िैसी दकसी वतामान और आसन्न आपातकालीन जस्ट्थजत के मामले में, जविेष रूप से वे िो मानव, पिु र्ा पौधों को खतरा र्ा िजत पहुंचाते हैं, िैसा दक राष्ट्रीर् और अंतरााष्ट्रीर् स्ट्तर पर जनधााररत दकर्ा गर्ा है, अध्र्ि िीघ्र अनुमोिन िेने के जलए प्राजधकरण की िजिर्ों का प्रर्ोग कर सकेगा और प्राजधकरण की अगली बैठक के समि स्ट् वीकृजत के जलए ऐसे सभी अनुमोिन प्रस्ट्तुत करेगा। (8) अध्र्ि ऐसी अन्द्र् िजिर्ों का प्रर्ोग तथा ऐसे अन्द्र् कार्ों को जनष् पादित करेगा िो उसे प्राजधकरण र्ा केन्द्रीर् सरकार द्वारा समर्-समर् पर प्रत्र्ार्ोजित दकए िाएं।
13. िैजवक संसाधनों और उनसे सहबद्ध ज्ञान तक पहुंच के जलए प्रदक्रर्ा.- (1) अजधजनर्म की धारा 3 की उपधारा (2) में जनर्िाष्ट कोई व्यजि, अनुसंधान र्ा िैव सवेिण और िैव उपर्ोग के जलए िैजवक संसाधनों और उनसे सहबद्ध ज्ञान तक पहुंच के जलए प्राजधकरण का अनुमोिन चाहता है तो वह प्राजधकरण के वेब पोिाल पर प्ररूप 1 में आवेिन करेगा और वाजणजज्र्क उपर्ोग के जलए वह प्राजधकरण के वेब पोिाल पर प्ररूप 2 में आवेिन करेगा। (2) अजधजनर्म की धारा 3 की उपधारा (2) में जनर्िाष्ट कोई व्यजि, िो िैव जवजवधता (संिोधन) अजधजनर्म, 2023 के लागू होने से पूवा दकसी िैजवक संसाधन पर स्ट् वाजमत् व रखता था, अनुसंधान, वाजणजज्र्क उपर्ोग, िैव सवेिण और िैव उपर्ोग के प्रर्ोिन के जलए प्राजधकरण का अनुमोिन प्राप्त करेगा। (3) उपजनर्म (1) के अधीन प्रत्र्ेक आवेिन राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता जनजध को इलेक्रॉजनक अंतरण र्ा जडजििल भुगतान के रूप में जवजनर्िाष्ट भुगतान सजहत होना चाजहए। (4) प्राजधकरण िैव जवजवधता प्रबंधन सजमजत के परामिा के पश्चात्, र्ा तो सीधे र्ा राज्र् िैव जवजवधता बोडा र्ा संघ राज्र् िेत्र िैव जवजवधता पररषि के माध्र्म से, और आवेिक व अन्द्र् स्रोतों से ऐसी अजतररि िानकारी एकत्र करने के बाि, िैसा अपेजित हो, और र्ोग् र् आवेिन के आधार पर, लाभ साझा करने सजहत ितों और जनर्मों के अधीन अनुमोिन प्रिान कर सकता है, र्ा पूणा रूप में आवेिन प्राप्त होने से नब्बे दिनों की अवजध के भीतर, िैसा उजचत समझे, अस्ट्वीकार कर सकता है:

परंतु र्दि प्राजधकरण द्वारा मांगी गई अपेजित सूचना आवेिक द्वारा सूचना मांगने की तारीख से तीस दिन की अवजध के भीतर उपलब्ध नहीं कराई िाती है, तो आवेिन जनरस्ट् त कर दिर्ा िाएगा और आवेिक को आवेिन जनरस्ट् त दकए िाने के बारे में सूजचत दकर्ा िाएगा:

परंतु र्ह और दक िैव जवजवधता प्रबंधन सजमजत, प्राजधकरण को अपने जवचार संप्रेजषत करने से पहले, िहां कहीं अपेजित हो, र्थाजस्ट्थजत उस संबंजधत समुिार्, व्यजि र्ा जनकार्, से परामिा कर सकेगी, िो िैव संसाधन पर स्ट्वाजमत्व रखता है, तादक उनकी पूवा सूजचत सहमजत सुजनजश्चत की िा सके:

परंतु र्ह भी दक वतामान र्ा आसन्न आपातकालीन जस्ट्थजत के मामले में, प्राजधकरण आवेिन पर िीघ्रता से कारावाई करेगा। (5) ऐसे िैजवक संसाधनों तक पहुंच का अनुमोिन प्राजधकरण के प्राजधकृत अजधकारी और आवेिक द्वारा जवजधवत् हस्ट्तािररत पारस्ट्पररक रूप से सहमत ितों पर समझौते के रूप में होगा:

परंतु, र्दि आवेिक को सूचना दिए िाने पर, प्राजधकरण द्वारा प्रारूप करार की संसूचना की तारीख से साठ दिन की अवजध के भीतर, आवेिक करार पर हस्ट्तािर नहीं करता है, तो आवेिन जनरस्ट् त माना समझा िाएग:

परंतु र्ह भी ऐसे जनरस्ट् त आवेिन पर नब्बे दिन की अवजध के भीतर उप-जनर्म (3) के अधीन नए आवेिन के जलए जनर्िाष्ट िुल्क के आधे का भुगतान प्राप्त होने पर पुन:जवचार दकर्ा िा सकता है। (6) प्राजधकरण र्दि र्ह समझता है दक अनुरोध स्ट्वीकार नहीं दकर्ा िा सकता है तो वह जलजखत रूप में ििा दकए िाने वाले कारणों से दकसी आवेिन को अस्ट्वीकार कर सकता है:
परंतु आवेिन तब तक अस्ट्वीकार नहीं दकर्ा िाएगा िब तक आवेिक को सुनवाई का उजचत अवसर न िे दिर्ा गर्ा हो। (7) प्राजधकरण अपनी वेबसाइि पर सभी स्ट्वीकृत र्ा अस्ट्वीकृत अनुमोिनों की सूचना िेगा तथा र्ह भी सुजनजश्चत करेगा दक ऐसी सूचना, िैसा दक अपेजित हो अन्द्र् एिेंजसर्ों के साथ साझा की िाए। (8) प्राजधकरण द्वारा समझौते के जनबंधनों और ितों के अनुपालन की जनगरानी राज्र् िैव जवजवधता बोडा र्ा संघ राज्र् िेत्र िैव जवजवधता पररषि, िैव जवजवधता प्रबंधन सजमजत र्ा प्राजधकरण द्वारा समुजचत समझी िाने वाली दकसी अन्द्र् अजभकरण को सजममजलत करके की िाएगी।
14. िैजवक संसाधनों और ऐसे िैजवक संसाधनों से संबद्ध ज्ञान तक पहुंच को प्रजतबंजधत करना.- (1) प्राजधकरण इस जनर्म के दकसी भी उपबंध के संबंध में उजचत समझी िाने वाली िांच करने के बाि जनम्नजलजखत कारणों से िैजवक संसाधनों और/र्ा ऐसे िैजवक संसाधनों से संबद्ध ज्ञान तक पहुंच को प्रजतबंजधत र्ा जनजषद्ध करने के जलए किम उठाएगा, अथाात: - (क) इस पहुुँच का अनुरोध अजधजनर्म की धारा 38 के अधीन अजधसूजचत प्रिाजतर्ों सजहत दकसी भी संकिग्रस्ट्त और/र्ा स्ट्थाजनक प्रिाजतर्ों के जलए है;
(ख) ऐसी पहुंच के अनुरोध के पररणामस्ट्वरूप स्ट्थानीर् समुिार्ों की आिीजवका और/र्ा सामाजिक-सांस्ट्कृजतक पहलुओं पर प्रजतकूल प्रभाव पड़ सकता है;
(ग) ऐसी पहुंच के अनुरोध के पररणामस्ट्वरूप पर्ाावरण पर प्रजतकूल प्रभाव पड़ सकता है जिसे जनर्ंजत्रत करना और कम करना करठन हो सकता है;
(घ) ऐसी पहुंच के जलए अनुरोध से आनुवंजिक िरण हो सकता है र्ा अजधजनर्म की धारा 37 के अधीन अजधसूजचत िेत्रों सजहत पाररजस्ट्थजतकी तंत्र के कार्ों पर असर पड़ सकता है;

(ङ) ऐसा अनुरोध राष्ट्रीर् जहत और भारत द्वारा दकए गए अन्द्र् संबंजधत अंतरााष्ट्रीर् समझौतों के जवपरीत प्रर्ोिनों के जलए संसाधनों के उपर्ोग हेतु दकर्ा गर्ा है;
(च) अन्द्र् कोई कारण जिसे जलजखत रूप में ििा दकर्ा िाएगा। (2) उप-जनर्म (1) के होते हुए भी, प्राजधकरण प्रत्र्ेक मामले के गुण-िोष के आधार तक, एक अवजध-जविेष के जलए उस उप-जनर्म के खंड (क) से (ङ) के अधीन उजल्लजखत कृजषकृत प्रिाजतर्ों के जलए अनुमजत िे सकता है।
15. अजधजनर्म की धारा 3 की उपधारा (2) के अधीन आने वाले व्यजिर्ों के साथ अनुसंधान के पररणामों को अंतररत करने र्ा स्ट्थानांतररत करने हेतु अनुमोिन प्राप्त करने की प्रदक्रर्ा.- (1) कोई व्यजि िो अजधजनर्म की धारा 3 की उपधारा (2) के अधीन आने वाले व्यजिर्ों के साथ िैजवक संसाधनों र्ा उससे संबद्ध पारंपररक ज्ञान से संबंजधत अनुसंधान के दकसी पररणाम को साझा करने र्ा अंतररत करने का इरािा रखता है, वह प्राजधकरण के वेब पोिाल पर जनम्नजलजखत प्रपत्रों में आवेिन कर सकता है, र्था: - (क) प्ररूप 3 अजधजनर्म की धारा 3 की उपधारा (2) के अधीन आने वाले व्यजिर्ों के साथ वाजणजज्र्क प्रर्ोिनों र्ा अन्द्र्था अनुसंधान के पररणामों को साझा करने र्ा अंतररत करने के जलए दकसी व्यजि द्वारा प्राजधकरण का पूवा अनुमोिन प्राप्त करने के जलए। (ख) प्ररूप 4 हस्ट्तांतररती (अजधजनर्म की धारा 3 की उपधारा (2) के अधीन आने वाले व्यजि) द्वारा अनुसंधान के पररणामों को आगे अनुसंधान के जलए उपर्ोग करने के जलए रजिस्ट्रीकरण हेतु;
(ग) प्ररूप 5 हस्ट्तांतररती (अजधजनर्म की धारा 3 की उपधारा (2) के अधीन आने वाले व्यजि) द्वारा वाजणजज्र्क उपर्ोग हेतु अनुसंधान के पररणामों का उपर्ोग करने हेतु प्राजधकरण का पूवा अनुमोिन प्राप्त करने के जलए;
(घ) प्ररूप 6 हस्ट्तांतररती (अजधजनर्म की धारा 3 की उपधारा (2) के अधीन आने वाले व्यजि) द्वारा बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकार प्राप्त करने के जलए अनुसंधान के पररणामों का उपर्ोग करने हेतु प्राजधकरण की पूवा स्ट्वीकृजत प्राप्त करने के जलए। (2) उपजनर्म (1) के अधीन प्रत्र्ेक आवेिन के साथ राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता जनजध में इलेक्रॉजनक अंतरण र्ा जडजििल भुगतान प्ररूप में भुगतान दकर्ा गर्ा िुल्क संलग्न करना होगा। (3) प्राजधकरण, आवेिक और अन्द्र् स्रोतों से, अपेिानुसार, अजतररि सूचना एकजत्रत करने के पश्चात्, तथा आवेिन के गुण- िोष के आधार पर, उप-जनर्म (1) के अधीन आवेिन की प्राजप्त के नब्बे दिन की अवजध के भीतर, लाभ में जहस्ट्सेिारी सजहत, ऐसे जनर्मों और ितों के अधीन िैसा उजचत समझे, अनुमोिन प्रिान कर सकता है, र्ा अस्ट्वीकार कर सकता है :

परंतु र्दि प्राजधकरण द्वारा मांगी गई अपेजित सूचना आवेिक के द्वारा सूचना मांगे िाने की तारीख से तीस दिन की अवजध के भीतर उपलब्ध नहीं कराई िाती है, तो आवेिन जनरस्ट् त कर दिर्ा िाना चाजहए और आवेिक को बंि होने के बारे में सूजचत दकर्ा िाएगा।

परंतु आवेिन तब तक अस्ट्वीकार नहीं दकर्ा िाएगा िब तक आवेिक को सुनवाई का उजचत अवसर न िे दिर्ा गर्ा हो। (4) इस जनर्म के अधीन जनर्िाष्ट अनुमोिन प्राजधकरण के प्राजधकृत अजधकारी और आवेिक द्वारा जवजधवत् हस्ट्तािररत, पारस्ट्पररक रूप से सहमत ितों पर समझौते के रूप में प्रिान दकए िाएंगे :

र्दि प्राजधकरण द्वारा प्रारूप करार की संसूचना की तारीख से साठ दिन की अवजध के भीतर, आवेिक को सूचना दिए िाने पर, करार पर हस्ट्तािर नहीं करता है, तो आवेिन जनरस्ट् त समझा िाएगा :

परंतु ऐसे बंि आवेिन को नब्बे दिन की अवजध के भीतर उप-जनर्म (2) के अधीन नए आवेिन के जलए जनर्िाष्ट िुल्क के आधे का भुगतान प्राप्त होने पर पुनिीजवत दकर्ा िा सकता है । (5) र्दि प्राजधकरण की र्ह रार् है दक उपजनर्म (1) के खंड (ख) के अधीन दकए गए रजिस्ट्रीकरण में जनर्िाष्ट दक्रर्ाकलापों अजधजनर्म के उद्देश्र्ों के जलए हाजनकारक र्ा प्रजतकूल हैं, तो वह आिेि द्वारा ऐसी दकसी दक्रर्ाकलापों को प्रजतजषद्ध र्ा सीजमत कर सकेगा। (6) खंड (ख) उपजनर्म (1) के अधीन प्राजधकरण के पास रजिस्ट् री आवेिक प्राजधकरण द्वारा अपेजित आवजधक जस्ट्थजत ररपोिा प्रस्ट्तुत करेगा।
16.
बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकारों के अनुिान से पूवा प्राजधकरण से रजिस्ट्रीकरण और पूवा अनुमोिन प्राप्त करने की प्रदक्रर्ा.- (1) अजधजनर्म की धारा 3 की उपधारा (2) में जनर्िाष्ट दकसी व्यजि द्वारा बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकारों के अनुिान से पूवा- अनुमोिन प्राप्त करने की प्रदक्रर्ा जनम्नानुसार होगी, र्था:- (क) इस अजधजनर्म की धारा 3 की उपधारा (2) में जनर्िाष्ट कोई व्यजि, भारत से प्राप्त िैजवक संसाधन पर जडजििल अनुक्रम सूचना सजहत अनुसंधान र्ा सूचना पर आधाररत दकसी आजवष्कार, जिसमें भारत के बाहर के भंडारों में िमा िैजवक संसाधन र्ा उससे संबद्ध पारंपररक ज्ञान भी सजममजलत है, के जलए भारत में र्ा बाहर दकसी बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकार के जलए प्राजधकरण के वेब पोिाल पर प्ररूप 7 में आवेिन करते हुए, भारत में र्ा बाहर दकसी बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकार के जलए आवेिन करते समर् भारत में र्ा अन्द्र्त्र सिम प्राजधकारी द्वारा बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकार प्रिान करने से पूवा प्राजधकरण का पूवा अनुमोिन प्राप्त करेगा;
(ख) खंड (क) के अधीन प्रत्र्ेक आवेिन के साथ राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता कोष को इलैक्राजनक अंतरण र्ा जडजििल भुगतान के रूप में संित्त जवजनर्िाष्ट िुल्क संलग्न दकर्ा िाएगा;
(ग) प्राजधकरण, आवेिक और अन्द्र् स्रोतों से ऐसी अजतररि िानकारी एकजत्रत करने के पश्चात, िैसा उजचत समझा िाए, और आवेिन के गुण-िोष से संतुष्ट होने पर, आवेिन प्राजप्त की तारीख से एक सौ अस्ट्सी दिन की अवजध के भीतर र्ा अपेजित िानकारी प्राप्त होने पर, िो भी बाि में हो, अनुमोिन िेने र्ा अन्द्र्था के संबंध जवजनश् चर् करेगा, िो लाभ में जहस्ट्सेिारी सजहत ऐसे जनर्मों और ितों के अधीन होगा, िैसा वह उजचत समझे:

परंतु र्दि प्राजधकरण द्वारा मांगी गई अपेजित सूचना आवेिक द्वारा सूचना मांगने की तारीख से नब्बे दिन की अवजध के भीतर उपलब्ध नहीं कराई िाती है तो आवेिन जनरस्ट् त कर दिर्ा िाएगा और आवेिक को ऐसे जनरस्ट् त होने के बारे में सूजचत दकर्ा िाएगा। (घ) अनुमोिन प्राजधकरण के प्राजधकृत अजधकारी और आवेिक द्वारा सम र्क रूप से हस्ट्तािररत पारस्ट्पररक रूप से सहमत ितों पर समझौते के रूप में प्रिान दकर्ा िाएगा:

परंतु प्राजधकरण द्वारा प्रारूप करार की संसूचना की तारीख से नब्बे दिन की अवजध के भीतर, आवेिक को सूचना दिए िाने पर, करार पर हस्ट्तािर नहीं करता है, तो आवेिन जनरस्ट् त समझा िाएगा :

परंतु ऐसे बंि आवेिन को उपजनर्म 1 के खंड (ख) के अधीन नर्ा आवेिन प्रस्ट्तुत करने के जलए जवजहत िुल्क की आधी राजि का नब्बे दिन की अवजध के भीतर भुगतान प्राप्त होने पर पुनिीजवत दकर्ा िा सकेगा;

(ङ) आवेिक बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकारों के अनुिान की तारीख से पैंतालीस दिनों के भीतर प्राजधकरण को सूजचत करेगा, ऐसा न होने पर सिम प्राजधकारी द्वारा उजचत समझी िाने वाली कारावाई की िाएगी;
(च) प्राजधकरण, कारणों को जलजखत रूप में ििा दकए िाने के बाि दकसी आवेिन को अस्ट्वीकार कर सकता है र्दि वह समझता है दक अनुरोध स्ट्वीकार नहीं दकर्ा िा सकता है:
परंतु आवेिन तब तक अस्ट्वीकार नहीं दकर्ा िाएगा िब तक आवेिक को सुनवाई का उजचत अवसर न िे दिर्ा गर्ा हो। (2) जनर्िाष्ट दकसी व्यजि द्वारा बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकार प्राप्त करने से पूवा पंिीकरण की प्रदक्रर्ा जनम्नानुसार होगी, र्था:- (क) अजधजनर्म की धारा 7 के अधीन जनर्िाष्ट कोई भी व्यजि , िो भारत में र्ा भारत के बाहर दकसी बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकार के जलए आवेिन करता है, भारत से प्राप्त िैजवक संसाधन पर जडजििल अनुक्रम सूचना सजहत अनुसंधान र्ा सूचना पर आधाररत दकसी आजवष्कार के जलए, जिसमें भारत के बाहर के भंडारों में िमा की गई िानकारी र्ा उससे संबद्ध पारंपररक ज्ञान भी िाजमल है, भारत र्ा जविेि में सिम प्राजधकारी द्वारा ऐसे बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकार प्रिान दकए िाने से पहले, प्राजधकरण के वेब पोिाल पर प्ररूप 8 में रजिस्ट्रीकरण कराएगा ;
(ख) प्राजधकरण के पास रजिस्ट्रीकरण के जलए खंड (क) के अधीन प्रत्र्ेक आवेिन के साथ राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता जनजध में इलेक्रॉजनक अंतरण र्ा जडजििल भुगतान के रूप में जवजनर्िाष्ट िुल्क संलग्न दकर्ा िाएगा;
(ग) र्दि प्राजधकरण की र्ह रार् है दक ऐसा आजवष्कार दकसी समुिार् र्ा व्यजि र्ा व्यजिर्ों के समूह द्वारा रखे गए ज्ञान तक अवैध तरीके से पहुंच का पररणाम है, तो प्राजधकरण न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क अजधकारी को िजत के संबंध में उच्चतर िुमााना लगाने की जसफाररि कर सकता है और साथ ही, िैसा भी मामला हो, मूल्र्ांदकत र्ा वसूल दकए गए मूल्र् के संबंध में भी;
(घ) आवेिक बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकार प्रिान दकर्े िाने के पैंतालीस दिन के भीतर प्राजधकरण को सूजचत करेगा;
(ङ) आवेिक रजिस्ट्रीकरण के समर् र्ह वचन िेगा दक बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकारों के व्यावसार्ीकरण से पूवा प्राजधकरण का पूवा अनुमोिन जलर्ा िाएगा । (3) जअ जधजनर्म की धारा 7 के अधीन जनर्िाष्ट दकसी व्यजि द्वारा बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकारों के व्यावसार्ीकरण के जलए प्राजधकरण का पूवा अनुमोिन प्राप्त करने की प्रदक्रर्ा जनम्नानुसार होगी:
(क) उपजनर्म (2) के खंड (ड.) के अधीन जनर्िाष्ट बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकारों के व्यावसार्ीकरण के समर्, आवेिक को प्राजधकरण के वेब पोिाल पर प्ररूप 9 में आवेिन करके पूवा अनुमोिन प्राप्त करना होगा। (ख) खंड (क) के अधीन प्रत्र्ेक आवेिन के साथ राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता कोष को इलैक्राजनक अंतरण र्ा जडजििल भुगतान के रूप में संित्त जवजनर्िाष्ट िुल्क संलग्न दकर्ा िाएगा;
(ग) प्राजधकरण आवेिक से र्ा अन्द् र् स्रोतों से ऐसी अजतररि िानकारी जिसे वह उजचत समझे प्राप् त करने के बाि और आवेिन के गुण के से संतुष्ट होने पर, आवेिन की प्राप् त की तारीख र्ा आवश् र्क िानकारी के प्राप् त होने पर, इनमें से िो भी बाि में हो, एक सौ अस्ट्सी दिनों की अवजध के भीतर ऐसी ितों और ििाओं, जिसमें लाभ की साझेिारी भी िाजमल है, के अधीन रहते हुए अनुमोिन िे सकता है अथवा िैसा वह उजचत समझे, इसे रोक भी सकता है।

(घ) अनुमोिन प्राजधकरण के प्राजधकृत अजधकारी और आवेिक द्वारा जवजधवत् हस्ट्तािररत पारस्ट्पररक रूप से सहमत ितों पर समझौते के रूप में प्रिान दकर्ा िाएगा:

प्राजधकरण द्वारा आवेिक को प्रारूप करार की संसूचना की तारीख से नब्बे दिन की अवजध के भीतर करार पर हस्ट्तािर नहीं करता है तो आवेिन रद्द समझा िाएगा:
बिते दक ऐसे बंि आवेिन को नब्बे दिन की अवजध के भीतर खंड 3(ख) के अधीन नए आवेिन के जलए जनर्िाष्ट िुल्क के आधे का भुगतान प्राप्त होने पर पुनिीजवत दकर्ा िा सकेगा।
17. पहुंच र्ा अनुमोिन का प्रजतसंहरण .- (1) प्राजधकरण दकसी जिकार्त के आधार पर र्ा स्ट्वतः जनर्म 13, 15, जनर्म 16 के उपजनर्म (1) और (3) तथा जनर्म 20 के अधीन दिए गए अनुमोिन को आवेिक को सुनवाई का उजचत अवसर िेने के पश्चात् जनम्नजलजखत ितों के अधीन रहते हुए दकसी करार र्ा उसके दकसी भाग को रद्द कर सकता है, र्था:- (i) इस उजचत जविास के आधार पर दक जिस व्यजि को अनुमोिन प्रिान दकर्ा गर्ा है, उसने झूठी र्ा भ्रामक सूचना िी है र्ा अजधजनर्म के दकसी प्रावधान र्ा जिन ितों पर अनुमोिन प्रिान दकर्ा गर्ा था, उनका उल्लंघन दकर्ा है;
(ii) िब अनुमोिन प्राप्त व्यजि समझौते की दकसी भी िता का पालन करने में जवफल रहा हो;
(iii) व्यापक लोकजहत में र्ा पर्ाावरण संरिण और िैव जवजवधता के संरिण के जलए, र्ा प्राजधकरण के ध्र्ान में लाए गए नए तथ्र्ों र्ा सूचना के आधार पर । (2) प्राजधकरण प्रत्र्ेक प्रजतसहरण -आिेि की एक प्रजत राज्र् िैव जवजवधता बोडा तथा संघ राज्र्िेत्र िैव जवजवधता पररषि् और िैव जवजवधता प्रबंधन सजमजत को भेिेगा। जिससे संबंजधत व्यजि की पहुंच पर रोक लगाने तथा र्दि कोई िजत हुई हो तो उसका आकलन करने तथा िजतपूर्ता की वसूली के जलए किम उठाने के जलए कहा गर्ा है।
18. दकसी जविेिी िेि से प्राप्त िैजवक संसाधन र्ा उससे संबद्ध पारंपररक ज्ञान के भारत में उपर्ोग की जनगरानी और जवजनर्मन के उपार् .- (1) कोई व्यजि िो दकसी बाहरी िेि से प्राप्त िैजवक संसाधन र्ा उससे संबद्ध पारंपररक ज्ञान का भारत में अनुसंधान र्ा वाजणजज्र्क प्रर्ोिन के जलए र्ा बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकार प्राप्त करने के जलए उपर्ोग करने का इरािा रखता है, वह अजधजनर्म की धारा 36(क) के उपबंधों के अनुसार प्राजधकरण के वेब पोिाल पर प्ररूप 10 में घोषणा प्रस्ट्तुत करेगा। (2) प्राजधकरण, अजधजनर्म की धारा 36(क) के उपबंधों के अनुसार, ऐसे िैजवक संसाधन र्ा उससे संबद्ध पारंपररक ज्ञान के उपर्ोगकताा से सुसंगत िानकारी प्राप्त करने के पश् चात्, उसे िैजवक जवजवधता संबंधी अजभसमर् के पहुंच और लाभसाझाकरण जक्लर्ररंग हाउस पर अजधसूजचत करेगा। (3) प्रिाता िेि के अनुरोध के आधार पर प्राजधकरण अजधजनर्म की धारा 36(क) के उपबंधों के अनुसार ऐसे उपर्ोग पर उजचत उपार् करेगा।
19. संवर्धात औषधीर् पौधों के जलए उत्पजत्त-प्रमाण पत्र प्राप्त करने की प्रदक्रर्ा .- (1) इस अजधजनर्म की धारा 7 के अंतगात जनर्िाष्ट कोई व्यजि, िो धारा 7 की उपधारा (2) के अंतगात संवर्धात औषधीर् पौधों तक पहुंच के जलए छूि का िावा करना चाहता है, वह संबंजधत िैव जवजवधता प्रबंधन सजमजत से प्रारूप 11 में उत्पजत्त-प्रमाण पत्र प्राप्त करने के जलए भौजतक र्ा जडजििल रूप में स्ट्व-घोषणा प्रस्ट्तुत करेगा।

(2) उप-जनर्म (1) में जनर्िाष्ट स्ट्व-घोषणा में आवेिक और कृषक का नाम और पता, सवेिण संख्र्ा सजहत भौगोजलक जस्ट्थजत, खेती के अधीन िेत्र की सीमा के साथ-साथ खेती की िा रही प्रिाजतर्ों और उनके भागों का ब्र्ौरा तथा उपर्ोग दकए िा रहे िैजवक संसाधनों की अनुमाजनत मात्रा सजहत ब्र्ौरा अंतर्वाष्ट होगा। (3) आवेिन के साथ इलेक्रॉजनक फॉमा में भुगतान दकर्ा गर्ा जनर्िाष्ट िुल्क संलग्न दकर्ा िाएगा। स्ट्थानीर् िैवजवजवधता कोष में धनराजि अंतरण र्ा जडजििल भुगतान द्वारा िमा की िा सकती है। (4) िैवजवजवधता प्रबंधन सजमजत, औषधीर् पौधों की खेती और किाई के बाि के ब्र्ौरे तथा प्रारूप 12 में रखी गई पुस्ट्तकों में की गई प्रजवजष्टर्ों सजहत आवेिक द्वारा प्रस्ट्तुत आवेिन के आधार पर, अजधजनर्म की धारा 7 की उपधारा (3) और उपजनर्म (1) के अधीन जनर्िाष्ट खेती दकए गए औषधीर् पौधों का उद्गम प्रमाण-पत्र पंरह दिन की अवजध के भीतर िारी करेगी:
परंतु र्दि पंरह दिन की अवजध के भीतर उत्पजत्त-प्रमाणपत्र िारी नहीं दकर्ा िाता है , तो आवेिक संबंजधत राज्र् िैव जवजवधता बोडा से संपका कर सकता है और उसका जनपिान सात दिन की अवजध के भीतर दकर्ा िा सकेगा:
परंतु र्ह और दक आवेिक, िैव जवजवधता प्रबंधन सजमजत र्ा संबंजधत राज्र् िैव जवजवधता बोडा के बीच दकसी जववाि की जस्ट्थजत में , उसे संबंजधत राज्र् िैव जवजवधता बोडा द्वारा प्राजधकरण को संिर्भात दकर्ा िाएगा और ऐसे मामले में प्राजधकरण का जवजनश् चर् अंजतम होगा। (5) अजधजनर्म की धारा 7 की उपधारा (2) के अंतगात छूि का िावा करने के जलए औषधीर् पौधों की उत्पजत्त के स्रोत को साजबत करने का िाजर्त्व अंजतम उपर्ोगकताा पर होगा।
20. भारतीर् अनुसंधानकताा र्ा संस्ट्था द्वारा भारत के बाहर गैर-वाजणजज्र्क अनुसंधान र्ा आपातकालीन प्रर्ोिनों के जलए अनुसंधान करने की प्रदक्रर्ा .- (1) कोई भी भारतीर् अनुसंधानकताा र्ा संस्ट्था िो महामारी िैसी कजतपर् वतामान र्ा आसन्न आपात जस्ट्थजतर्ों से जनपिने के जलए अत्र्ावश्र्क अध्र्र्न करने सजहत गैर-वाजणजज्र्क अनुसंधान करने के जलए िैजवक संसाधन को भारत से बाहर ले िाने र्ा भेिने का आिर् रखता है, वह प्राजधकरण के वेब पोिाल पर प्ररूप 13 में आवेिन करेगा:
परंतु दक र्दि उससे संबद्ध पारंपररक ज्ञान को भी िैजवक संसाधनों के साथ स्ट्थानांतररत र्ा ले िार्ा िाना हो तो संबंजधत जविेिी संस्ट्था द्वारा जनर्म 13 के अधीन प्राजधकरण का अनुमोिन जलर्ा िाएगा। (2) उपजनर्म (1) के अधीन प्रत्र्ेक आवेिन के साथ राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता कोष को जडजििल भुगतान के इलेक्रॉजनक अंतरण के रूप में भुगतान दकर्ा गर्ा जवजनर्िाष्ट िुल्क संलग्न दकर्ा िाएगा । (3) प्राजधकरण उपजनर्म (1) के अधीन आवेिन से संतुष्ट होने पर आवेिन प्राजप्त की तारीख से पैंतालीस दिन की अवजध के भीतर अपना अनुमोिन प्रिान करेगा । (4) उप-जनर्म (3) के अधीन प्राजधकरण का अनुमोिन प्राप्त होने पर, आवेिक, भारत के बाहर िैजवक संसाधन ले िाने र्ा भेिने से पहले, िहां भी अपेजित हो, वाउचर नमूने जनर्िाष्ट राष्ट्रीर् जनिेपगृहों में िमा करेगा और ऐसे िमा के प्रमाण की एक प्रजत प्राजधकरण को पृष्ांदकत की िाएगी।
21. राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता जनजध का प्रबंधन और उपर्ोग .- (1) राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता जनजध का संचालन प्राजधकरण के अध्र्ि र्ा ऐसे अन्द्र् अजधकारी द्वारा दकर्ा िाएगा, जिसे इस संबंध में प्राजधकृत दकर्ा िाए ।

(2) राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता जनजध के िो पृथक खाते होंगे, एक धारा 27 की उपधारा 1 के खंड (क) से संबंजधत तथा िूसरा अजधजनर्म की उपधारा (1) के खंड (ख) और (ग) के अधीन, जिसका उपर्ोग प्राजधकरण द्वारा जवजनजश्चत दकए गए अनुसार धारा 27 की उपधारा (2) में जनर्िाष्ट दक्रर्ाकलापों के जलए दकर्ा िाएगा । (3) उपार्िात मौदरक लाभ सजहत सभी प्राजप्तर्ां राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता कोष में िमा की िाएंगी। (4) प्राजधकरण, राज्र् िैव जवजवधता बोडा र्ा संघ राज्र्िेत्र िैव जवजवधता पररषि के जलए जनधााररत दकर्ा िाने वाला लाभ बंिवारा, र्थाजस्ट्थजत, न्द्र्ूनतम िस प्रजतित से अजधकतम पंरह प्रजतित तक हो सकता है और िेष लाभ िावेिारों को र्ा अन्द्र् उपर्ोगों के जलए तब अंतररत दकर्ा िा सकता है, िब लाभ िावेिारों की पहचान नहीं की िाती है। (5) प्राजधकरण जनजध के उपर्ोग की जनगरानी के जलए उपार् जनर्िाष्ट कर सकता है ।
22. अजधजनर्म की धारा 50 के अधीन जववािों के जनपिारे के जलए अपील .- (1) र्दि प्राजधकरण और राज्र् िैव जवजवधता बोडा र्ा संघ राज्र्िेत्र िैव जवजवधता पररषि र्ा बोडों और पररषिों के बीच दकसी आिेि र्ा जनिेि के कार्ाान्द्वर्न र्ा दकसी नीजतगत जनणार् के संबंध में कोई जववाि उत्पन्न होता है, तो र्थाजस्ट्थजत व्यजथत पिों में से कोई भी र्ा प्राजधकरण र्ा बोडा र्ा पररषि, अजधजनर्म की धारा 50 के अधीन प्ररूप 14 में केंरीर् सरकार को अपील कर सकेगा। (2) राज्र् िैव जवजवधता बोडा र्ा संघ राज्र्िेत्र िैव जवजवधता पररषि और दकसी अन्द्र् बोडा र्ा पररषि के बीच अथवा बोडों र्ा पररषिों के बीच दकसी जववाि की जस्ट्थजत में, केंरीर् सरकार उसे समाधान के जलए प्राजधकरण को जनर्िाष्ट कर सकेगी। (3) अपील ज्ञापन के साथ उस आिेि, जनिेि र्ा नीजतगत जवजनश् र्च, िैसी भी जस्ट्थजत हो की एक प्रमाजणत प्रजत भी संलग्न करनी होगी जिसको लेकर आवेिनकताा को जिकार्त है और इसे ऑनलाइन तथा उक् त आिेि, जनिेि र्ा नीजतगत जवजनश् र्च की तारीख से 30 दिनों के भीतर िमा करना होगा। परंतु र्दि केन्द्र सरकार का र्ह समाधान हो िाता है दक अपील प्रस्ट्तुत करने में जवलमब के जलए अच्छा और पर्ााप्त आधार था तो वह उसके जलए िो कारण हैं उन्द्हें जलजपबद्ध करके, तीस दिन की पूवोि अवजध की समाजप्त के पश्चात् अपील प्रस्ट्तुत करने की अनुमजत िे सकेगी। (4) अपील की सुनवाई के जलए सूचना प्राजधकरण के वेब पोिाल पर प्ररूप 15 में िी िाएगी। (5) िहां कोई जववाि उपजनर्म (2) के अधीन प्राजधकरण को जनर्िाष्ट दकर्ा िाता है, वहां प्राजधकरण प्राकृजतक न्द्र्ार् के जसद्धांतों द्वारा मागािर्िात होगा और िहां तक साध्र् होगा, उसी प्रदक्रर्ा का अनुसरण करेगा जिसका अनुसरण करने की केन्द्रीर् सरकार से इस जनर्म के अधीन अपेिा की िाती है। (6) केंरीर् सरकार र्ा प्राजधकरण, अपीलकताा तथा अन्द्र् पिकारों को सुनने के पश्चात् तथा अन्द्र् सुसंगत तथ्र्ों, र्दि कोई हों, पर जवचार करने के पश्चात्, साठ दिन की अवजध के भीतर अपील का जनपिारा करेगा। (7) दकसी अपील का जनपिारा करते समर्, केन्द्रीर् सरकार र्ा प्राजधकरण, र्थाजस्ट्थजत, आिेजपत आिेि, जनिेि र्ा नीजतगत जवजनश् चर् को संिोजधत र्ा रद्द कर सकेगा।
23. न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क अजधकारी द्वारा िांच का तरीका .- (1) कोई भी न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क अजधकारी अजधजनर्म की धारा 55 में जनर्िाष्ट उपबंधों के गैर-अनुपालन र्ा उल्लंघन की जिकार्त की िांच नहीं करेगा, िब तक दक जिकार्त प्राजधकृत अजधकारी द्वारा र्ा उसकी ओर से, सभी आवश्र्क िस्ट्तावेिों के साथ, र्ा तो स्ट्वप्रेरणा से र्ा दकसी अभ्र्ावेिन की प्राजप्त पर फाईल नहीं की िाती है।

(2) जिकार्त का प्रजतजनजधत्व एक प्रस्ट्तुतकताा अजधकारी द्वारा दकर्ा िा सकेगा, िो एक जवजधक व्यवसार्ी होगा और वह प्राजधकृत अजधकाररर्ों की ओर से उनके संबंजधत िेत्राजधकार के भीतर न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क अजधकारी के समि उपजस्ट्थत होगा और मामला प्रस्ट्तुत करेगा। (3) प्रस्ट्तुतकताा अजधकारी उपजनर्म (1) के अधीन मामले को न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क अजधकारी को अग्रेजषत करने से पहले, उजचत समर्क् तत्परता बरतते हुए उस पर कार्ावाही करेगा, तथा सभी सुसंगत तथ्र्ों और पररजस्ट्थजतर्ों को ररकाडा पर लाएगा जिन्द्हें िाजस्ट्त अजधरोजपत करने के जलए ध्र्ान में रखना आवश्र्क है, तथा र्ह भी पता लगाएगा दक क्र्ा र्ह न्द्र्ार्जनणार्न के जलए आवश्र्क मामला है और प्राजधकृत अजधकारी मामले से संबंजधत सभी सुसंगत िस्ट्तावेि और तथ्र् प्रस्ट्तुतकताा अजधकारी को उपलब्ध कराएगा। (4) न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क अजधकारी जिकार्त प्राप्त होने के तीस दिन के भीतर उस व्यजि को नोरिस िारी करेगा जिसके जवरुद्ध अजधजनर्म की धारा 55 क के अधीन धारा 3 र्ा धारा 4 र्ा धारा 6 र्ा धारा 7 के उपबंधों का गैर-अनुपालन र्ा उल्लंघन आरोजपत दकर्ा गर्ा है, तथा उसके जवरुद्ध मामले का जववरण िेते हुए गैर-अनुपालन र्ा उल्लंघन की प्रकृजत स्ट्पष्ट रूप से जनर्िाष्ट करेगा और ऐसा व्यजि र्ा तो व्यजिगत रूप से र्ा दकसी प्राजधकृत प्रजतजनजध के माध्र्म से, जवजनर्िाष्ट तारीख को, िो उस पर तामील की तारीख से पन्द्रह दिन से कम नहीं होगी और तीस दिन से अजधक नहीं होगी, ऐसे प्रारूप में िैसा दक केन्द्रीर् सरकार द्वारा जवजहत दकर्ा िा सकता है, उपजस्ट्थत हो सकता है। (5) नोरिस में जनर्िाष्ट तारीख को, व्यजि र्ा उसका अजधकृत प्रजतजनजध न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क अजधकारी के समि उसके जवरुद्ध लगाए गए आरोपों को स्ट्वीकार र्ा अस्ट्वीकार कर सकेगा । (6) र्दि व्यजि र्ा उसका प्रजतजनजध आरोपों को स्ट्वीकार करता है, तो न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क अजधकारी अपने आिेि में ऐसी स्ट्वीकृजत का उल्लेख करेगा और िंड अजधरोजपत करेगा तथा आिेि की एक प्रजत संबंजधत उपजस्ट्थत अजधकारी और उस व्यजि को भेिेगा जिसके जवरुद्ध जिकार्त ििा की गई है। (7) उपजनर्म (6) के अधीन न आने वाले मामलों में, न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क अजधकारी िांच के जलए तारीख जनर्त करेगा तथा मामले को प्रस्ट्तुत करने के जलए संबंजधत उपजस्ट्थत अजधकारी को इसकी सूचना िेगा। (8) जनर्त तारीख पर, न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क प्राजधकारी उस व्यजि को ऐसे िस्ट्तावेि र्ा साक्ष्र् प्रस्ट्तुत करने का अवसर िेगा जिन्द्हें वह िांच के जलए संगत समझता है। (9) र्दि कोई व्यजि पर्ााप्त कारण के जबना िैसादक उपजनर्म (8) द्वारा अपेजित है, न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क प्राजधकारी के समि उपजस्ट्थत होने में जवफल रहता है र्ा मना करता है तो न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क प्राजधकारी ऐसे व्यजि की अनुपजस्ट्थजत में िांच संबंधी कारावाई कर सकता है। (10) न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क प्राजधकारी, उक् त अजधजनर्म की धारा 55ख के अधीन प्राजधकारी र्ा प्राजधकृत अजधकारी के जनष्कषों का भी उल्लेख कर सकेगा र्ा उनकी सेवाओं का उपर्ोग, िहां आवश्र्क हो, कर सकेगा। (11) ऐसी िांच करते समर्, न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क प्राजधकारी को साक्ष्र् र्ा कोई िस्ट्तावेि, िो न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क प्राजधकारी की रार् में िांच की जवषर्-वस्ट्तु के जलए उपर्ोगी र्ा सुसंगत हो सकता है, प्रस्ट्तुत करने के जलए मामले के तथ्र्ों और पररजस्ट्थजतर्ों से पररजचत दकसी भी व्यजि को समन करने और हाजिर करने की िजि होगी। (12) उप-जनर्म (11) के प्रर्ोिनों के जलए, न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क प्राजधकारी को जसजवल प्रदक्रर्ा संजहता, 1908 में जवजनर्िाष्ट अनुसार जसजवल न्द्र्ार्ालर् की जनम्नजलजखत िजिर्ां होंगी, अथाात :- (क) दकसी भी व्यजि को समन और हाजिर करना और िपथ दिलाकर उसकी िांच करना;

(ख) िस्ट्तावेिों र्ा अन्द्र् इलेक्रॉजनक अजभलेखों की खोि और प्रस्ट् तुत करने की मांग करना; और (ग) िपथ-पत्रों के संबंध में साक्ष्र् प्राप्त करना। (13) संबंजधत प्रस्ट्तुतकताा अजधकारी द्वारा मामले की प्रस्ट्तुजत करने, उक् त व्यजि द्वारा दिए गए प्रजतवाि और ऐसी सूचना, र्था आवश् र्क, का अजभलेखन दकए िाने पर, न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क प्राजधकारी र्ा तो अजभकथन को खाररि कर िेगा र्ा ऐसा आिेि, िो वह ठीक समझे, िेगा। (14) न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क प्राजधकारी के सभी आिेि, इस बात पर ध्र्ान दिए जबना दक ऐसे आिेि द्वारा िाजस्ट्त अजधरोजपत की गई है र्ा नहीं, आख् र्ापक आिेि होंगे। (15) न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क प्राजधकारी प्रत्र्ेक मामले का न्द्र्ार्जनणार्न उप-जनर्म (7) के अधीन जनधााररत तारीख से नब्बे दिन के भीतर पूरा करेगा, जिसे पर्ााप्त कारण होने पर नब्बे दिन की अजतररक् त अवजध तक बढार्ा िा सकता है। (16) र्दि इस जनर्म के अधीन प्राप्त दकसी जिकार्त की जवषर्-वस्ट्तु, उक् त मामले की प्राजप्त की तारीख को राष्ट्रीर् हररत अजधकरण र्ा सिम िेत्राजधकार के दकसी अन्द्र् न्द्र्ार्ालर् के समि पहले से ही जवचाराधीन है, तो इस जनर्म के अधीन कार्ावाजहर्ां तब तक िुरू नहीं की िाएंगी िब तक दक ऐसे बाि वाले मामले का अंजतम रूप से जनपिान नहीं हो िाता है और न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क प्राजधकारी इस उप-जनर्म के अधीन कार्ावाजहर्ों के स्ट्थगन का आिेि नहीं िे िेता। (17) र्दि न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क प्राजधकारी इस बात से संतुष् ि हो िाता है दक संबंजधत व्यजि उक् त अजधजनर्म की धारा 3 र्ा धारा 4 र्ा धारा 6 र्ा धारा 7 के उपबंधों का अनुपालन करने में जवफल रहा है तो वह उक् त अजधजनर्म की धारा 55 के उपबंधों के अनुसरण में र्थोजचत िाजस्ट्त अजधरोजपत करेगा। (18) र्दि दकसी अजधकरण र्ा न्द्र्ार्ालर् ने उप-जनर्म (16) के अधीन जनर्िाष्ट कार्ावाजहर्ों में इस आिर् का आिेि पहले ही िे दिर्ा है, तो न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क प्राजधकारी िाजस्ट्त के जलए कोई आिेि नहीं िेगा। (19) कोई व्यजि र्ा प्रसुजवधा का िावाकताा, िो इस अजधजनर्म के अधीन दकसी अपराध के बारे में दकसी न्द्र्ार्ालर् के समि पररवाि करने का आिर् रखता है, प्रपत्र 16 में कम से कम तीस दिन पहले इसकी सूचना केन्द्रीर् सरकार र्ा इस जनजमत्त प्राजधकृत प्राजधकरण र्ा प्राजधकारी को उक् त अजधजनर्म की धारा 61 के अधीन जिकार्त करने के अपने आिर् के बारे में ऑनलाइन र्ा पावती प्राप् त कर रजिस्ट्रीकृत पोस्ट्ि र्ा स्ट्पीड पोस्ट्ि के माध्र्म से सूजचत करेगा। (20) सूचना प्राप्त करने से तीस दिन की अवजध की समाजप्त पर और प्राजधकरण र्ा केन्द्रीर् सरकार द्वारा की गई कारावाई से संतुष्ट न होने पर, ऐसा व्यजि र्ा जहतलाभ िावाकताा, उक् त अजधजनर्म के अधीन अपराध का संज्ञान लेने का िेत्राजधकार रखने वाले न्द्र्ार्ालर् के समि जलजखत जिकार्त ििा कर सकेगा।

परंतु केन्द्रीर् सरकार र्ा कोई प्राजधकरण र्ा उस सरकार द्वारा प्राजधकृत प्राजधकारी, उक् त अजधजनर्म की धारा 61 के खंड(क) के अधीन न्द्र्ार्ालर् को इस अजधजनर्म के अधीन दकसी अपराध का संज्ञान लेने के जलए जलजखत जिकार्त कर सकेगा।
24. न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क प्राजधकारी के आिेि से अपील .- न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क प्राजधकारी के आिेि से व्यजथत कोई व्यजि, उक् त अजधजनर्म की धारा 52क के अधीन राष्ट्रीर् हररत अजधकरण अजधजनर्म, 2010 (2010 का 19) की धारा 3 के अधीन स्ट्थाजपत राष्ट्रीर् हररत अजधकरण में अपील कर सकेगा।

25. िाजस्ट्त की मात्रा अवधाररत करते समर् जवचार दकए िाने वाले कारक .- (1) न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क प्राजधकारी िाजस्ट्त की मात्रा अवधाररत करने के जलए जनम्नजलजखत कारकों का र्थोजचत ध्र्ान रखेगा, अथाात:- (क) उक् त अजधजनर्म के उपबंधों के उल्लंघन के पररणामस्ट्वरूप दकए गए अनुपातहीन लाभ र्ा अनुजचत फार्िे, िहां भी मात्रात्मक हो, की राजि;
(ख) उक् त अजधजनर्म की धारा 55 में जनर्िाष्ट उपबंधों के उल्लंघन के जलए िाजस्ट्त, एक लाख रुपए से कम नहीं होगी और पचास लाख रुपए तक बढाई िा सकेगी;
(ग) ऐसे मामले, जिसमें हुई िजत, उप-जनर्म (2) के अधीन अवधाररत िाजस्ट्त की राजि से अजधक है, तो िाजस्ट्त हुई िजत के अनुरूप होगी। स्ट्पष्टीकरण - इस खंड में अजभव्यक् त - िजत में पर्ाावरण की िजत और प्रर्ुि िैजवक संसाधन का मूल्र् तथा उक् त अजधजनर्म के उपबंधों का उल्लंघन करके उससे व्युत्पन्न उत्पािों का मूल्र् िाजमल है;
(घ) जवफल रहने र्ा जनरंतर उल्लंघन होने के मामले में, उप-जनर्म (2) र्ा (3) के अधीन िाजस्ट्त के अजतररि अजधकतम एक करोड़ रुपए की अजतररि िाजस्ट्त अजधरोजपत की िाएगी;
(ङ) कोई अन्द्र् चीिें, िो न्द्र्ार्जनणाार्क प्राजधकारी द्वारा िैवजवजवधता के संरिण और पर्ाावरण की सुरिा के जलए सुसंगत समझी िाएंगी। (2) संबंजधत व्यजि र्ा इकाई को मामले में सुनवाई का उजचत अवसर दिए जबना िाजस्ट्त अजधरोजपत नहीं की िाएगी। (3) उक् त अजधजनर्म के अधीन न्द् र्ार्जनणाार्क प्राजधकारी द्वारा अजधरोजपत िाजस्ट्त, उक् त अजधजनर्म की धारा 55 और राष्ट्रीर् हररत अजधकरण अजधजनर्म, 2010 (2010 का 19) की धारा 17 के अधीन राहत र्ा मुआविे का भुगतान करने के िाजर्त्व के अजतररि होगी।
26. िाजस्ट्त की राजि का जनिेपण .– इन जनर्मों के अधीन वसूली गई िाजस्ट्तर्ों की समस्ट् त राजिर्ां, राष्ट्रीर् िैवजवजवधता जनजध में िमा की िाएंगी और उक् त अजधजनर्म की धारा 7 के अधीन अपराधों से संबंजधत िाजस्ट्तर्ों की समस्ट्त राजिर्ां, र्थाजस्ट्थजत संबंजधत राज्र् िैवजवजवधता बोडा र्ा संघ राज्र् िेत्र िैवजवजवधता पररषि की िैवजवजवधता जनजध, में िमा की िाएंगी। पहली अनुसूची आवेिन प्ररूप और िुल्क क्र.सं.
आवेिन का प्रर्ोिन आवेिन िुल्क (1) (2) (3)
1.
उक् त अजधजनर्म की धारा 3(2) के अधीन आने वाले व्यजिर्ों द्वारा अनुसंधान र्ा िैव-सवेिण और िैव-उपर्ोग के जलए िैजवक संसाधनों र्ा उससे संबद्ध ज्ञान तक पहुंच के जलए राष्ट्रीर् िैवजवजवधता प्राजधकरण का पूवा अनुमोिन प्राप्त करने के जलए आवेिन

व् र्जष्ट के जलए ₹ 10,000.00 इकाई के जलए ₹ 20,000.00

2.
उक् त अजधजनर्म की धारा 3(2) के अधीन आने वाले व्यजिर्ों द्वारा वाजणजज्र्क उपर्ोग के जलए िैजवक संसाधनों र्ा उससे संबद्ध ज्ञान तक पहुंच के जलए राष्ट्रीर् िैवजवजवधता प्राजधकरण का पूवा अनुमोिन प्राप्त करने के जलए आवेिन

व् र्जष्ट के जलए ₹ 10,000.00 इकाई के जलए ₹ 20,000.00
3.
वाजणजज्र्क प्रर्ोिनों के जलए र्ा अन्द्र्था व्यजिर्ों द्वारा धारा 3(2) के अधीन अनुसंधान के पररणामों को साझा र्ा हस्ट् तांतररत करने के जलए राष्ट्रीर् िैवजवजवधता प्राजधकरण का पूवा अनुमोिन प्राप्त करने के जलए आवेिन

व् र्जष्ट के जलए ₹ 5,000.00 इकाई के जलए ₹ 10,000.00
4.
हस्ट्तांतररती (धारा 3(2) व्यजि) द्वारा आगे के अनुसंधान के जलए अनुसंधान के पररणामों का उपर्ोग करने के जलए राष्ट्रीर् िैवजवजवधता प्राजधकरण के पास पूवा रजिस्ट्रीकरण करने के जलए आवेिन।

व् र्जष्ट के जलए ₹ 2,000.00 इकाई के जलए ₹ 5,000.00
5.
हस्ट्तांतररती (धारा 3(2) व्यजि) द्वारा वाजणजज्र्क उपर्ोग के जलए अनुसंधान के पररणामों का उपर्ोग करने के जलए राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण का पूवा अनुमोिन प्राप्त करने के जलए आवेिन

व् र्जष्ट के जलए ₹ 10,000.00 इकाई के जलए ₹ 20,000.00
6.
हस्ट्तांतररती (धारा 3(2) व्यजि) द्वारा बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकार प्राप्त करने के जलए अनुसंधान के पररणामों का उपर्ोग करने के जलए पूवा अनुमोिन प्राप्त करने के जलए आवेिन

व् र्जष्ट के जलए ₹ 5,000.00 इकाई के जलए ₹ 10,000.00
7.
उक् त अजधजनर्म की धारा 3(2) के अधीन आने वाले व्यजिर्ों द्वारा बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकार स्ट् वीकृत करने से पूवा राष्ट्रीर् िैवजवजवधता प्राजधकरण का पूवा अनुमोिन प्राप्त करने के जलए आवेिन

व् र्जष्ट के जलए ₹ 5,000.00 इकाई के जलए ₹ 10,000.00
8.
उक् त अजधजनर्म की धारा 7 के अधीन आने वाले व्यजिर्ों द्वारा बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकार स्ट् वीकृत करने से पूवा राष्ट्रीर् िैवजवजवधता प्राजधकरण के पास रजिस्ट्रीकरण के जलए आवेिन।

व् र्जष्ट के जलए ₹ 2,000.00 इकाई के जलए ₹ 5,000.00
9.
उक् त अजधजनर्म की धारा 7 के अधीन आने वाले व्यजिर्ों द्वारा बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकारों के वाजणज्र्ीकरण के जलए राष्ट्रीर् िैवजवजवधता प्राजधकरण का पूवा अनुमोिन प्राप्त करने के जलए आवेिन।

व् र्जष्ट के जलए ₹ 5,000.00 इकाई के जलए ₹ 10,000.00
10.
भारत में दकसी भी जविेिी से प्राप्त िैजवक संसाधनों र्ा संबद्ध पारंपररक ज्ञान के उपर्ोग की घोषणा के जलए प्रपत्र। िून्द् र्
11.
खेती दकए गए औषधीर् पौधों की उत्पजत्त का प्रमाण-पत्र प्राप्त करने के जलए आवेिन सह संरूप ₹ 200.00
12.
िैवजवजवधता प्रबंधन सजमजत द्वारा अनुरजित दकए िाने के जलए खेती दकए गए औषधीर् पौधों के ब् र्ौरे वाली पुस्ट्तक का संरूप िून्द् र्
13.
गैर-वाजणजज्र्क अनुसंधान र्ा आपातकालीन प्रर्ोिनों के जलए अनुसंधान करने के जलए भारतीर् अनुसंधानकतााओं/संस्ट्थानों द्वारा िैजवक संसाधनों को भारत के बाहर भेिने/ले िाने के जलए राष्ट्रीर् िैवजवजवधता प्राजधकरण का पूवा अनुमोिन प्राप्त करने के जलए आवेिन। ₹ 1,000.00
14.
जववािों के जनपिारे के जलए केंरीर् सरकार के समि अपील ज्ञापन का प्रपत्र िून्द्र्
15.
पर्ाावरण, वन और िलवार्ु पररवतान मंत्रालर् र्ा राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण द्वारा उनके समि हाजिर होने के जलए िारी की िाने वाली सूचना का संरूप िून्द्र्
16.
दकसी भी व्यजि/लाभ िावाकताा द्वारा सूचना का संरूप िून्द्र् िूसरी अनुसूची [जनर्म 2(1) (छ) िेखें] {उक् त अजधजनर्म की धारा 3 और जनर्म 13(1) िेखें} उक् त अजधजनर्म की धारा 3(2) के अधीन आने वाले व्यजिर्ों द्वारा अनुसंधान र्ा िैव-सवेिण और िैव-उपर्ोग के जलए िैजवक संसाधनों र्ा उससे संबद्ध ज्ञान तक पहुंच के जलए राष्ट्रीर् िैवजवजवधता प्राजधकरण का पूवा अनुमोिन प्राप्त करने के जलए आवेिन

आवेिक का जववरण (i) आवेिक की श्रेणी

(ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू) क.
व् र्जष्ट ख.
व् र्जष्ट और इकाई ग.
इकाई (ii) आवेिक का नाम

(iii) आवेिक की जस्ट्थजत

(ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू) क.
एनआरआई ख.
गैर-भारतीर् ग.
उक् त अजधजनर्म की धारा 3(2) के अधीन आने वाली इकाई।

(iv) आवेिक का पता

(जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक का पता)

(v) व् र्जष्ट/इकाई की जववरजणका

(vi) व्यवसार् की प्रकृजत (आवेिक के इकाई होने पर लागू) (vii) आवेिक के जलए प्राजधकृत प्रजतजनजध का ब् र्ौरा (आवेिक के इकाई होने पर लागू)

(जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक के पते के साथ नाम)

(viii) भारत में आवेिक से संपका के जलए व्यजि (र्दि कोई हो) (जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक के पते के साथ नाम)

(2) पहुंच प्राप् त करने के जलए आिजर्त िैजवक संसाधनों और उससे संबंद्ध ज्ञान का ब् र्ौरा (i) िैजवक संसाधन का ब् र्ौरा (ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू) i.
िैजवक संसाधनों की प्रकृजत

(पौधा / पिु / रोगाणु / आनुवंजिक सामग्री / दकस्ट्म/ संकर) ii.
सामान्द् र् नाम iii.
वैज्ञाजनक नाम (िीनस और प्रिाजतर्ां / जवजवधता / नस्ट् ल) iv.
पौधे के भाग (बीि, तना, छाल, पत्ती, फूल, फल, िड़, प्रकंि, आनुवंजिक सामग्री, अका, ररसाव, आदि) v.
प्रत्र्ेक िैजवक संसाधन की मात्रा दकग्रा./ग्रा./जम. में) vi.
पंहुच की अवजध (प्रत् र्ाजित आरंजभक और अंजतम तारीख) vii.
पहुंच की आवृजत्त (िैजवक संसाधनों तक दकतनी बार पहुंच प्राप् त की िाएगी)

viii.
पहुंच का स्रोत (वन्द् र् / खेती / संस्ट्थान / भंडारगृह / व्यापारी / बािार) ix.
भौगोजलक अवजस्ट्थजत (गांव, तालुक, जिला, राज्र्)। र्दि दकसी व्यापारी/संस्ट्थान से खरीिा गर्ा है, तो उनका नाम, पता और संपका ब् र्ौरा दिर्ा िाए;
र्दि भंडारगृह/संस्ट्थान से खरीिा गर्ा है, तो एकत्रण का स्रोत बतार्ा िाए। (ii) इससे संबद्ध ज्ञान के बारे में ब् र्ौरा :
(क) संबद्ध ज्ञान की प्रकृजत (मौजखक/प्रलेजखत)

(ख) पहुंच प्राप् त करने के जलए आिजर्त पारंपररक ज्ञान का ब् र्ौरा (अजधकतम 100 िब्िों में)

(ग) पारंपररक ज्ञान धारक (व्यजि/समुिार्) का नाम

(घ) पारंपररक ज्ञान धारक (व्यजि/समुिार्) का पता

(3) अनुसंधान की प्रत् र्ाजित अवजध

(4) प्रर्ोिन, जिसके जलए पहुंच अपेजित है, के साथ-साथ इसका उपर्ोग करते हुए दकए िा रहे और दकए िाने के जलए प्रत् र्ाजित अनुसंधान का प्रकार और जवस्ट् तार (i) अनुसंधान के बारे में संजिप्त जववरण

(ii) िोध के प्रत् र्ाजित पररणाम

(5) अनुसंधान और जवकास दक्रर्ाकलापों में भाग लेने वाले दकसी संस्ट्थान का ब् र्ौरा (i) व्यजि र्ा संस्ट्थान का नाम

(ii) संपका ब् र्ौरा (जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक का पता)

(6) लाभ सहभािन का वरीर् रीजत i.
मौदरक ii.
गैर-मौदरक iii.
िोनों (7) पहुंच प्रिान दकए गए िैजवक संसाधनों और उससे संबद्ध ज्ञान के उपर्ोग से भारत/समुिार्ों को होने वाले लाभों का आकलन

(8) संगत समझी िाने वाली कोई अन्द्र् िानकारी

(9) आवेिन िुल्क के प्रेषण का ब् र्ौरा (भुगतान की रीजत, संव् र्वहार आईडी, राजि, तारीख, आदि)

घोषणा मैं/हम घोषणा करता हं/करते हैं दक :

1.
प्रस्ट्ताजवत िैजवक संसाधनों के एकत्रण से संसाधनों की संधारणीर्ता पर प्रजतकूल प्रभाव नहीं पड़ेगा;
2.
प्रस्ट्ताजवत िैजवक संसाधनों के एकत्रण से कोई पर्ाावरणीर् प्रभाव नहीं पड़ेगा;
3.
प्रस्ट्ताजवत िैजवक संसाधन के एकत्रण से पाररप्रणाजलर्ों के जलए कोई िोजखम उत् पन्द् न पैिा नहीं होगा; और
4.
प्रस्ट्ताजवत िैजवक संसाधनों और उससे संबद्ध ज्ञान के एकत्रण से स्ट्थानीर् समुिार्ों पर प्रजतकूल प्रभाव नहीं पड़ेगा।

मैं/हम र्ह भी घोषणा करता हं/करते हैं दक आवेिन प्रपत्र में िी गई सूचना मेरी/हमारी िानकारी और जविास के अनुसार सत्र् और सही है और इसमें कुछ भी छुपार्ा नहीं गर्ा है और इसका कोई भी भाग गलत नहीं है। प्रिान की गई दकसी भी असत् र् र्ा गलत सूचना के जलए मैं/हम उत् तरिार्ी होंगे।

स्ट्थान

हस्ट् तािर तारीख

नाम {उक् त अजधजनर्म की धारा 3 और जनर्म 13(1) िेखें} उक् त अजधजनर्म की धारा 3(2) के अधीन आने वाले व्यजिर्ों द्वारा वाजणजज्र्क उपर्ोग के जलए िैजवक संसाधनों र्ा उससे संबद्ध ज्ञान तक पहुंच के जलए राष्ट्रीर् िैवजवजवधता प्राजधकरण का पूवा अनुमोिन प्राप्त करने के जलए आवेिन

आवेिक का जववरण (i) आवेिक की श्रेणी (ड्रॉप-डाउन मेनू) क.
व् र्जष्ट ख.
व् र्जष्ट और इकाई ग.
इकाई (ii) आवेिक का नाम

(iii) आवेिक की जस्ट्थजत (ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू) क.
एनआरआई ख.
गैर-भारतीर् ग.
उक् त अजधजनर्म की धारा 3(2) के अधीन आने वाली इकाई (iv) आवेिक का पता (जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक का पता)

(v) व् र्जष्ट/इकाई की जववरजणका

(vi) व्यवसार् की प्रकृजत (आवेिक के इकाई होने पर लागू)

(vii) आवेिक के जलए प्राजधकृत प्रजतजनजध का ब् र्ौरा (आवेिक के इकाई होने पर लागू) (जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक के पते के साथ नाम)

(viii) भारत में आवेिक से संपका के जलए व्यजि (र्दि कोई हो)

(जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक के पते के साथ नाम)

(2) पहुंच प्राप् त करने के जलए आिजर्त िैजवक संसाधनों और उससे संबंद्ध ज्ञान का ब् र्ौरा (i) िैजवक संसाधन का ब् र्ौरा (ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू) i.
िैजवक संसाधन की प्रकृजत

(पौधा/पिु/रोगाणु/आनुवंजिक सामग्री/दकस्ट्म/संकर) ii.
साधारण नाम iii.
वैज्ञाजनक नाम (िीनस और प्रिाजतर्ां/जवजवधता/नस्ट् ल) iv.
पौधे के भाग (बीि, तना, छाल, पत्ती, फूल, फल, िड़, प्रकंि, आनुवंजिक सामग्री, अका, ररसाव, आदि) v.
प्रत्र्ेक िैजवक संसाधन की मात्रा दकग्रा./ग्रा./जमली. में) vi.
पंहुच की अवजध (प्रत् र्ाजित आरंजभक और अंजतम तारीख) vii.
पहुंच का स्रोत (वन्द् र्/खेती/संस्ट्थान/ भंडारगृह/व्यापारी/बािार) viii.
भौगोजलक अवजस्ट्थजत (गांव, तालुक, जिला, राज्र्)। र्दि दकसी व्यापारी/संस्ट्थान से खरीिा गर्ा है, तो उनका नाम, पता और संपका ब् र्ौरा दिर्ा िाए; र्दि भंडारगृह/संस्ट्थान से खरीिा गर्ा है, तो एकत्रण का स्रोत बतार्ा िाए। (ii) इससे संबद्ध ज्ञान के बारे में ब् र्ौरा :
(क) संबद्ध ज्ञान की प्रकृजत (मौजखक/प्रलेजखत)

(ख) पहुंच प्राप् त करने के जलए आिजर्त पारंपररक ज्ञान का ब् र्ौरा (अजधकतम 100 िब्िों में)

(ग) पारंपररक ज्ञान धारक (व्यजिगत /समुिार्) का नाम

(घ) पारंपररक ज्ञान धारक (व्यजि/ समुिार्) का पता

(3) प्रर्ोिन, जिसके जलए पहुंच अपेजित है, के साथ-साथ इसका उपर्ोग करते हुए दकए िा रहे और दकए िाने के जलए प्रत् र्ाजित अनुसंधान का प्रकार और जवस्ट् तार

(i) वाजणजज्र्क उपर्ोग के बारे में संजिप्त जववरण

(ii) वाजणजज्र्क उपर्ोग की प्रत् र्ाजित अवजध

(4) अनुसंधान र्ा िैव-सवेिण और िैव-उपर्ोग के प्रर्ोिन हेतु प्राजधकरण से प्राप्त अनुमोिन का ब् र्ौरा (i) एनबीए आवेिन संख्र्ा

(ii) अनुमोिन की तारीख

(iii) राष्ट्रीर् िैवजवजवधता प्राजधकरण द्वारा प्रित्त अनुमोिन (करार के रूप में) की प्रजत अपलोड करें

(5) लाभ सहभािन का वरीर् रीजत i. मौदरक ii. गैर-मौदरक iii. िोनों (6) उपलब्ध िैजवक संसाधनों और उनसे संबंजधत ज्ञान के उपर्ोग से भारत/समुिार्ों को जमलने वाले लाभों का आकलन

(7) कोई अन्द्र् सुसंगत िानकारी

(8) आवेिन िुल्क के प्रेषण का जववरण (भुगतान की रीजत, संव् र्वहार आईडी, राजि, जतजथ, आदि)

घोषणा मैं/हम घोषणा करते हैं दक:
1. प्रस्ट्ताजवत िैजवक संसाधन के एकत्रण से संसाधनों की संधारणीर्ता पर प्रजतकूल प्रभाव नहीं पड़ेगा;
2. प्रस्ट्ताजवत िैजवक संसाधन के एकत्रण से कोई पर्ाावरणीर् प्रभाव नहीं पड़ेगा;
3. प्रस्ट्ताजवत िैजवक संसाधन के एकत्रण से पारर-प्रणाली को कोई खतरा नहीं होगा; और
4. प्रस्ट्ताजवत िैजवक संसाधन और उससे िुड़ी िानकारी से स्ट्थानीर् समुिार्ों पर प्रजतकूल प्रभाव नहीं पड़ेगा।

मैं/हम र्ह भी घोषणा करते हैं दक आवेिन प्रपत्र में िी गई सूचना मेरे/हमारी िानकारी और जविास के अनुसार सत्र् और सही है तथा इसमें कुछ भी जछपार्ा नहीं गर्ा है और इसका कोई भी भाग गलत नहीं है। मैं/हम िी गई दकसी भी असत् र् र्ा गलत िानकारी के जलए उत् तरिार्ी होंगे।

स्ट् थान हस्ट् तािर तारीख नाम {अजधजनर्म की धारा 4 और जनर्म 15(1)(क) िेखें} वाजणजज्र्क प्रर्ोिनों र्ा अन्द्र्था के जलए अनुसंधान के पररणामों को धारा 3(2) के अधीन व्यजिर्ों के साथ साझा करने र्ा हस्ट् तांतररत करने के जलए राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण से पूवा अनुमोिन प्राप्त करने के जलए आवेिन (1) आवेिक का जववरण (i) आवेिक की श्रेणी (ड्रॉप-डाउन मेनू) क. व् र्जष्ट ख. व् र्जष्ट और इकाई ग. इकाई (ii) आवेिक का नाम

(ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू)

क.
भारतीर् ख.
एनआरआई ग.
गैर-भारतीर् घ.
अजधजनर्म की धारा 3(2) के अधीन आने वाली इकाई ङ.
अजधजनर्म की धारा 7 के अधीन आने वाली इकाई (iv) आवेिक का पता (जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक पता)

(v) व् र्जष्ट/संस्ट्था का प्रोफाइल

(vi) कार्ा की प्रकृजत (र्दि आवेिक कोई संस्ट् था है तो लागू)

(vii) आवेिक के जलए अजधकृत प्रजतजनजध का जववरण (र्दि आवेिक कोई इकाई है तो लागू) नाम, डाक पता(पते) सजहत जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर)

(viii) भारत में आवेिक का िानकार व्यजि (र्दि कोई हो) (नाम, डाक पता(पते) सजहत जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर)

(2) अनुसंधान के पररणाम का जववरण (i) दकए गए अनुसंधान के पररणामों का जववरण

(ii) हस्ट् तांतररत र्ा साझा दकए िाने वाले अनुसंधान के पररणामों का जववरण और प्रकृजत

(3) अनुसंधान में प्रर्ुक् त िैजवक संसाधनों का जववरण (ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू) i. िैजवक संसाधन की प्रकृजत (पौधे/पिु/सूक्ष्मिीव/आनुवंजिक सामग्री/दकस्ट्म/संकर) ii. सामान्द्र् नाम iii. वैज्ञाजनक नाम (िीनस और प्रिाजत/दकस्ट्म/उपभेि) iv. पौधे के भाग (बीि, तना, छाल, पत्ती, फूल, फल, िड़, प्रकंि, आनुवंजिक सामग्री, अका, स्राव, आदि) v. पहुंच का स्रोत (िंगली/खेती/संस्ट्था/भंडार/व्यापारी/बािार)

vi. भौगोजलक जस्ट्थजत (गांव, तालुका, जिला, राज्र्)। र्दि दकसी व्यापारी संस्ट्थान से खरीिा गर्ा है, तो उनका नाम, पता और संपका जववरण प्रिान दकर्ा िाना चाजहए; र्दि भंडार/संस्ट्था से खरीिा गर्ा है, तो एकत्रण का स्ट् थान बतार्ाा िाना चाजहए। (4) िोध में प्रर्ुि पारमपररक िानकारी (र्दि कोई हो) का जववरण (i) प्राप्त पारंपररक ज्ञान का जववरण (100 िब्िों से अजधक नहीं)

(ii) पारंपररक ज्ञान धारक (व्यजिगत समुिार्) का नाम

(iii) पारंपररक ज्ञान धारक (व्यजिगत/समुिार्) का पता

(iv) समुिार्/व्यजि से प्राप्त सहमजत, र्दि कोई हो

(5) धारा 3(2) के व्यजिर्ों द्वारा अनुसंधान करने के जलए प्राजधकरण से प्राप्त अनुमोिन का जववरण (i) एनबीए आवेिन संख्र्ा

(ii) अनुमोिन की तारीख

(iii) राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण द्वारा िी गई स्ट्वीकृजत (समझौते के रूप में) की प्रजत अपलोड करें

(6) उस संस्ट्था का जववरण िहाुँ अनुसंधान और जवकास के दक्रर्ा कलाप दकए गए (i) उस संस्ट्थान/संस्ट्था का नाम और संपका जववरण प्रिान करें िहाुँ अनुसंधान और जवकास के दक्रर्ा कलाप दकए गए

(ii) संस्ट्था का नाम

(iii) संपका जववरण (जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक पता)

(iv) उस संस्ट्थान/संस्ट्था के सिम प्राजधकारी द्वारा आवेिक को िारी दकए गए पत्र की एक प्रजत संलग्न करें िहाुँ अनुसंधान और जवकास के कार्ा दकए गए।

(7) उस व् र्जष्ट/इकाई का जववरण जिसे अनुसंधान पररणाम हस्ट्तांतररत र्ा साझा दकए िाने हैं। (i) व् र्जष्टक इकाई का नाम और संपका जववरण

(ii) हस्ट्तांतररती व्यजि द्वारा अनुसंधान पररणामों के इजच्छत उपर्ोग का जववरण

(8) अनुसंधान के पररणामों को साझा करने र्ा हस्ट्तांतरण के जलए अनुमोिन चाहने वाले आवेिक

को जमलने वाले आर्थाक, वैज्ञाजनक र्ा अन्द्र् लाभों का जववरण। (9) प्रस्ट्ताजवत प्राप्तकताा और आवेिक के बीच जनष्पादित दकसी समझौता ज्ञापन र्ा समझौते का जववरण, जिसमें अनुसंधान के पररणामों को साझा करने र्ा हसतांतररत करने के जलए अनुमोिन मांगा गर्ा हो (समझौता ज्ञापन/समझौते की प्रजत, र्दि कोई हो, अपलोड की िानी है।)

(10) कोई अन्द्र् सुसंगत िानकारी

(11) आवेिन िुल्क के प्रेषण का जववरण (भुगतान की रीजत, लेन-िेन आईडी, राजि, तारीख आदि)

घोषणा मैं/हम घोषणा करते हैं दक:
क. मैं/हम हस्ट्तांतररती को सूजचत करते हैं दक र्दि वह अजधजनर्म के जवद्यमान उपबंधों के अनुसार आगे के अनुसंधान के जलए अनुसंधान के पररणामों का उपर्ोग करने का इरािा रखता है तो उसे प्राजधकरण के पास रजिस्ट्रीकरण कराना होगा।

ख. मैं/हम हस्ट्तांतररती को सूजचत करते हैं दक र्दि वह अजधजनर्म के जवद्यमान उपबंधों के अनुसार वाजणजज्र्क उपर्ोग के जलए र्ा बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकार प्राप्त करने के जलए अनुसंधान के पररणामों का उपर्ोग करने का इरािा रखता है तो उसे प्राजधकरण की पूवा स्ट्वीकृजत लेनी होगी।

ग. आवेिन में िी गई सूचना मेरे/हमारी िानकारी और जविास के अनुसार सत्र् और सही है और इसमें कुछ भी जछपार्ा नहीं गर्ा है और इसका कोई भी भाग गलत नहीं है। मैं/हम प्रिान की गई दकसी भी असत् र् र्ा गलत िानकारी के जलए उत् तरिार्ी होंगे।

स्ट् थान हस्ट् तािर तारीख नाम {अजधजनर्म की धारा 4 और जनर्म 15(1)(ख) िेखें} हस्ट्तांतररती द्वारा आगे के अनुसंधान के जलए अनुसंधान के पररणामों का उपर्ोग करने के जलए राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण के साथ रजिस्ट्रीकरण के जलए आवेिन (1) आवेिक (हस्ट्तांतररती) का जववरण (i) आवेिक की श्रेणी

(ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू) क. व् र्जष्ट ख. व् र्जष्ट और इकाई ग. इकाई (ii) आवेिक का नाम

(ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू) क. एनआरआई ख. गैर-भारतीर् ग. अजधजनर्म की धारा 3(2) के अंतगात आने वाली संस्ट्था (iv) आवेिक का पता (जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक पता)

(v) व् र्जष्ट/संस्ट्था का प्रोफाइल

(vi) व्यवसार् की प्रकृजत (र्दि आवेिक एक इकाई है तो लागू)

(vii) संगठन का भारतीर् रुपर्े में कारोबार (र्दि आवेिक एक इकाई है तो लागू)

(viii) आवेिक के जलए अजधकृत प्रजतजनजध का जववरण (र्दि आवेिक एक इकाई है तो लागू) (जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक पता)

(ix) भारत में िानकार व् र्जि (र्दि कोई हो तो) (जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक पता)

(2) अजधजनर्म की धारा 4 और 20 के अधीन हस्ट्तांतरणकताा र्ा उस व्यजि द्वारा प्राजधकरण से प्राप्त अनुमोिन का जववरण जिससे अनुसंधान के पररणाम प्राप्त दकए गए हैं (i) व्यजि/इकाई/संस्ट्था का नाम

(ii) जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक पता

(iii) एनबीए आवेिन संख्र्ा

(iv) अनुमोिन की तारीख

(v) राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण द्वारा िी गई स्ट्वीकृजत (समझौते के रूप में) की प्रजत अपलोड करें

(3) आवेिक द्वारा की िाने वाली िोध दक्रर्ाकलापों के बारे में संजिप्त जववरण

(4) अनुसंधान में िाजमल होने वाले दकसी भी व्यजि र्ा संस्ट्थान का जववरण (i) व्यजि र्ा संस्ट्थान का नाम

(ii) संपका जववरण (जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक पता)

(5) अनुसंधान की अपेजित अवजध

(6) अनुसंधान के अपेजित पररणाम

(7) अनुसंधान के प्राप्त पररणामों के उपर्ोग पर प्रस्ट्ताजवत िोध से भारत/समुिार्ों को जमलने वाले लाभ

(8) प्रासंजगक मानी िाने वाली कोई अन्द्र् िानकारी

(9) आवेिन िुल्क के प्रेषण का जववरण (भुगतान का तरीका, लेन-िेन आईडी, राजि, तारीख आदि)

घोषणा क. मैं/हम र्ह भी घोषणा करते हैं दक आवेिन पत्र में िी गई सूचना मेरे/हमारी िानकारी और जविास के अनुसार सत्र् और सही है तथा इसमें कुछ भी जछपार्ा नहीं गर्ा है और इसका कोई भी भाग गलत नहीं है। ख. मैं/हम प्रिान की गई दकसी भी असत् र् र्ा गलत िानकारी के जलए उत् तरिार्ी होंगे। ग. मैं/हम प्रत्र्ेक कैलेंडर वषा के अंत में प्राजधकरण को अनुसंधान दक्रर्ाकलापों में हुई प्रगजत की घोषणा करेंगे। घ. मैं/हम अजधजनर्म की धारा 4 और 6 के अनुसार क्रमिः भारत के भीतर र्ा बाहर अनुसंधान के प्राप्त पररणामों के वाजणजज्र्क उपर्ोग र्ा बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकार प्राप्त करने के समर् प्राजधकरण की पूवा स्ट्वीकृजत प्राप्त करेंगे। स्ट् थान हस्ट् तािर तारीख नाम {अजधजनर्म की धारा 4 और जनर्म 15(1)(ग) िेखें} अनुसंधान के पररणामों को हस्ट्तांतररती द्वारा वाजणजज्र्क उपर्ोग हेतु दक्रर्ाकलापों करने के जलए राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण का पूवा अनुमोिन प्राप्त करने के जलए आवेिन। (1) आवेिक (स्ट्थानांतररती) का जववरण (i) आवेिक की श्रेणी

(ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू) क. व् र्जष्ट (व् र्जष्टर्ों) ख. व् र्जष्ट (व् र्जष्टर्ों) और इकाई/ इकाईर्ां ग. इकाई/इकाईर्ां

(ii) आवेिक का नाम

(ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू) क. एनआरआई ख. गैर-भारतीर् ग. अजधजनर्म की धारा 3(2) के अधीन आने वाली संस्ट्था

(iv) आवेिक का पता

(जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल, वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक पता) (v) व्यजि/संस्ट्था का जववरण

(vi) व्यवसार् की प्रकृजत (र्दि आवेिक एक इकाई है तो लागू)

(vii) संगठन का िनाओवर भारतीर् रुपर्े में (र्दि आवेिक एक इकाई है तो लागू)

(viii) अजधकृत प्रजतजनजध (र्दि आवेिक कोई इकाई है तो लागू) (जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल, वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक पता)

(ix) भारत में िानकार व्यजि (र्दि कोई हो) (जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल, वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक पता)

(2) अजधजनर्म की धारा 4 और 20 के अधीन हस्ट्तांतरणकताा र्ा उस व्यजि द्वारा प्राजधकरण से प्राप्त अनुमोिन का जववरण जिससे अनुसंधान के पररणाम प्राप्त दकए गए हैं (i) व्यजि/इकाई/इकाई का नाम

(ii) जपन कोड सजहत डाक पता

(iii) ई-मेल आईडी, मोबाइल, वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर

(iv) एनबीए आवेिन संख्र्ा

(v) अनुमोिन की तारीख

(vi) राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण द्वारा िी गई स्ट्वीकृजत (समझौते के रूप में) की प्रजत अपलोड करें

(3) आवेिक द्वारा की िाने वाली वाजणजज्र्क दक्रर्ाकलाप के बारे में संजिप्त जववरण

(4) वाजणजज्र्क उपर्ोग की अपेजित अवजध

(5) अनुसंधान के प्राप्त पररणामों के वाजणजज्र्क उपर्ोग से भारत/समुिार्ों को जमलने वाले अपेजित पररणाम और लाभ

(6) प्रासंजगक मानी िाने वाली कोई अन्द्र् िानकारी

(7) आवेिन िुल्क के प्रेषण का जववरण (भुगतान का तरीका, लेनिेन आईडी, राजि, तारीख, आदि)

घोषणा

क. मैं/हम र्ह भी घोषणा करते हैं दक आवेिन पत्र में िी गई सूचना मेरे/हमारी िानकारी और जविास के अनुसार सत्र् और सही है तथा इसमें कुछ भी जछपार्ा नहीं गर्ा है और इसका कोई भी भाग गलत नहीं है। ख. मैं/हम िी गई दकसी भी असत् र् र्ा गलत िानकारी के जलए उत् तरिार्ी होंगे।

स्ट् थान हस्ट् तािर तारीख नाम {अजधजनर्म की धारा 4 और जनर्म 15(1)(घ) िेखें}

हस्ट्तांतररती द्वारा बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकार प्राप्त करने के जलए अनुसंधान के पररणामों का उपर्ोग करने के जलए राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण से पूवा अनुमोिन प्राप्त करने के जलए आवेिन। (1) आवेिक (स्ट्थानांतररती) का जववरण (i) आवेिक की श्रेणी

(ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू) क. व् र्जष्ट ख. व् र्जष्ट और संस्ट्था ग. इकाई (ii) आवेिक का नाम

(ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू) क. अजनवासी भारतीर् (एनआरआई) ख. गैर-भारतीर् ग. अजधजनर्म की धारा 3(2) के अंतगात आने वाली इकाई (iv) आवेिक का पता (जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल, वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक पता)

(v) व् र्जष्ट/ इकाई का प्रोफाइल

(vi) व्यवसार् की प्रकृजत (र्दि आवेिक कोई इकाई है तो लागू)

(vii) भारतीर् रुपए में संगठन का िनाओवर (र्दि आवेिक कोई इकाई है तो लागू)

(viii) अजधकृत प्रजतजनजध (र्दि आवेिक कोई इकाई है तो लागू) (जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल, वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक पता)

(ix) पेिेंि वकील/संपका व्यजि का जववरण (जपन कोड, ई-मेल, मोबाइल, वैकजल्पक मोबाइल और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक पता)

(2) उस हस्ट्तान्द्तरणकताा का जववरण जिससे अनुसंधान के पररणाम प्राप्त दकर्े गर्े हैं (i) व्यजि/ इकाई /संस्ट्था का नाम

(ii) जपन कोड सजहत डाक पता

(iii) ई-मेल आईडी, मोबाइल, वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर (3) हस्ट्तांतरणकताा र्ा उस व्यजि द्वारा जिससे अनुसंधान अजधजनर्म की धारा 4 के अंतगात के पररणाम प्राप्त दकए गए हैं, राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण से प्राप्त अनुमोिन का जववरण (i) एनबीए आवेिन संख्र्ा

(ii) अनुमोिन की तारीख

(iii) राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण द्वारा िी गई स्ट्वीकृजत (समझौते के रूप में) की प्रजत अपलोड करें

(4) आजवष्कार का जववरण (i) आजवष्कार का िीषाक

(ii) आजवष्कार का सार/ब् र्ौरा

(iii) उस पेिेंि कार्ाालर् का ब् र्ौरा िहां आवेिक उि आजवष्कार के जलए पेिेंि आवेिन िार्र करना चाहता है

(iv) क्र्ा वतामान आजवष्कार के जलए आि की तारीख तक भारत में र्ा भारत के बाहर कोई बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकार आवेिन िार्र दकर्ा गर्ा है

(5) आवेिन िुल्क के प्रेषण का जववरण (भुगतान की रीजत, लेनिेन आईडी, राजि, तारीख, आदि)

(6) कोई अन्द्र् िानकारी िो सुसंगत मानी िाए

घोषणा क.
मैं/हम र्ह भी घोषणा करते हैं दक आवेिन पत्र में िी गई िानकारी मेरे/हमारे ज्ञान और जविास के अनुसार सत्र् और सही है तथा इसमें कुछ भी जछपार्ा नहीं गर्ा है और इसका कोई भी भाग असत् र् नहीं है। ख.
मैं/हम दकसी भी गलत र्ा अनुजचत िानकारी के जलए उत् तरिार्ी होंगे।

स्ट् थान हस्ट् तािर तारीख नाम

{अजधजनर्म की धारा 6(1) एवं जनर्म 16(1)(क) िेखें} अजधजनर्म की धारा 3(2) के अंतगात आने वाले व्यजिर्ों द्वारा बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकार प्रिान करने से पहले राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण का पूवा अनुमोिन प्राप्त करने के जलए आवेिन। (1) आवेिक का जववरण (i) आवेिक की श्रेणी (ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू) क. व् र्जष्ट ख. व् र्जष्ट और इकाई ग. इकाई (ii) आवेिक का नाम (पेिेंि आवेिन के अनुसार)

(iii) आवेिक की जस्ट्थजत (ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू) क. अजनवासी भारतीर्(एनआरआई) ख. गैर-भारतीर् ग. अजधजनर्म की धारा 3(2) के अंतगात आने वाली इकाई (iv) आवेिक का पता (जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक पता)

(v) व् र्जष्ट/इकाई का प्रोफाइल

(vi) व्यवसार् की प्रकृजत (र्दि आवेिक एक इकाई है तो लागू)

(vii) अजधकृत प्रजतजनजध का जववरण (र्दि आवेिक कोई इकाई है तो लागू) (नाम, जपन कोड सजहत डाक पता, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर)

(viii) पेिेंि वकील/संपका व्यजि का जववरण (र्दि लागू हो) (नाम, जपन कोड सजहत डाक पता, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर)

(2) अजधजनर्म की धारा 3 के अंतगात अनुसंधान के जलए राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण से प्राप्त अनुमोिन का ब् र्ौरा (i) एनबीए आवेिन संख्र्ा

(ii) अनुमोिन की तारीख

(iii) राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण द्वारा िी गई स्ट्वीकृजत (समझौते के रूप में) की प्रजत अपलोड करें

(3) अनुसंधान एवं जवकास संबंधी कार्ाकलापों में िाजमल दकसी अन्द्र् संगठन का ब् र्ौरा

(4) आजवष्कार का ब् र्ौरा (i) आजवष्कार का िीषाक

(ii) आजवष्कार का िेत्र

ड्रॉप डाउन (कृजष-रसार्न, िैव प्रौद्योजगकी, रसार्न, खाद्य, िवा, कपड़ा, िैवरसार्न, बहुलक प्रौद्योजगकी, सूक्ष्म िीव जवज्ञान, िैव-जचदकत्सा इंिीजनर्ररंग, कृजष इंिीजनर्ररंग, पारंपररक ज्ञान िैव प्रौद्योजगकी, पारंपररक ज्ञान रसार्न र्ा कोई अन्द्र् प्रासंजगक िेत्र) (iii) आजवष्कार का सार/ब् र्ौरा (एक सौ पचास िब्िों से अजधक नहीं)

(iv) उस पेिेंि कार्ाालर् का जववरण िहां आवेिक उि आजवष्कार के जलए पेिेंि आवेिन िार्र करना चाहता है [ ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू में डाले िाने वाले िेिों के नाम ] (v) वतामान आजवष्कार के जलए आि की तारीख तक भारत में र्ा भारत के बाहर कोई पेिेंि आवेिन िार्र दकर्ा गर्ा है हां /नहीं

(vi) र्दि (v) का उत्तर 'हां' है, तो जववरण प्रिान दकर्ा िाए:
क्रम सं.
िेि का नाम [ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू] पेिेंि कार्ाालर् जिसमें आवेिन िार्र दकर्ा गर्ा है [ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू] पेिेंि आवेिन िाजखल करने की तारीख पेिेंि आवेिन संख्र्ा आि की तारीख के अनुसार आवेिन की जस्ट्थजत (िार्र/प्रकाजित/परीिणाधीन /सुनवाई के अधीन/स्ट्वीकृत) [ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू] र्दि प्रिान दकर्ा गर्ा हो तो पेिेंि संख्र्ा और अनुिान की तारीख

(5) आजवष्कार में उपर्ोग दकए गए/िावा दकए गए िैजवक संसाधन का जववरण

क. उपर्ोग दकए गए िैजवक संसाधन(ओं) की प्रकृजत (पौधे/पिु/सूक्ष्मिीव/कवक/िैवाल और अन्द्र्) [ड्रॉप डाउन] ख. सामान्द् र् नाम ग. वैज्ञाजनक नाम (वंि और प्रिाजत/दकस्ट्म/उपभेि) घ. पौधे के भाग (संपूणा पौधा, बीि, तना, छाल, पत्ती, फूल, फल, िड़, प्रकंि, आदि) [ड्रॉप डाउन]

ङ. प्राजप्त का स्रोत (बािार/व्यापारी/वन्द् र्/स्ट्वकृजष/भंडार/अन्द्र् जवजनर्िाष्ट दकए िाने चाजहए) [ड्रॉप डाउन] च. भौगोजलक जस्ट्थजत (गांव, तालुका , जिला, राज्र्)। र्दि व्यापारी/संस्ट्था से खरीिा गर्ा है, तो इकाई का नाम, पता और संपका जववरण प्रिान दकर्ा िाना चाजहए। र्दि भंडार/संस्ट्था से खरीिा गर्ा है, तो संग्रह की उत्पजत्त प्रिान की िानी चाजहए। (6) इससे संबंजधत दकसी भी पारंपररक ज्ञान, िहां तक पहुंच हो, का जववरण (i) इससे संबंजधत पारंपररक ज्ञान का जववरण, िहां तक पहुंच हो, (एक सौ िब्िों से अजधक नहीं)

(ii) इससे संबद्ध पारंपररक ज्ञान के धारक(धारकों) का नाम (व् र्जष्ट/समुिार्)

(iii) पारंपररक ज्ञान धारक व्यजि/समुिार् का पता)

(iv) दकसी अन्द्र् स्रोत से प्राप्त उससे संबंजधत पारंपररक ज्ञान

(7) कोई अन्द्र् िानकारी िो प्रासंजगक मानी िाए

(8) आवेिन िुल्क के प्रेषण का जववरण (भुगतान का तरीका, लेनिेन आईडी, राजि, जतजथ, आदि)

घोषणा मैं/हम घोषणा करते हैं दक:
क. आवेिन पत्र में िी गई िानकारी मेरे/हमारे ज्ञान और जविास के अनुसार सत्र् एवं सही है तथा इसमें कुछ भी जछपार्ा नहीं गर्ा है तथा इसका कोई भी भाग असत् र् नहीं है। ख. मैं/हम दकसी भी गलत र्ा अनुजचत िानकारी के जलए स्ट् वर्ं उत् तरिार्ी होंगे। ग. जनर्म 16 के अधीन, स्ट्वीकृत पेिेंि का व्यवसार्ीकरण करते समर् िैजवक संसाधनों और उससे संबंजधत िानकारी प्राप् त करने के जलए राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण की पूवा स्ट्वीकृजत अजनवार्ा है।

स्ट्थान हस्ट्तािर तारीख नाम

{अजधजनर्म की धारा 6(1क) एवं जनर्म 16(2) (क िेखें}

अजधजनर्म की धारा 7 के अंतगात आने वाले व्यजिर्ों द्वारा बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकार प्रिान करने से पहले राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण में रजिस्ट्रीकरण के जलए आवेिन (1) आवेिक का जववरण (i) आवेिक की श्रेणी

(ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू) क. व् र्जष्ट ख. व् र्जष्ट और इकाई ग. इकाई (ii) आवेिक का नाम (पेिेंि आवेिन के अनुसार)

(ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू) क. भारतीर् ख. अजधजनर्म की धारा 7 के अंतगात आने वाली इकाई (iv) आवेिक का पता

(जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक पता)

(v) व्यजि/इकाई का प्रोफाइल

(vi) व्यवसार् की प्रकृजत ( र्दि आवेिक एक इकाई है तो लागू )

(vii) अजधकृत प्रजतजनजध का जववरण (र्दि आवेिक कोई इकाई है तो लागू)

(नाम, जपन कोड सजहत डाक पता, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर)

(viii) पेिेंि वकील/संपका व्यजि का जववरण ( र्दि लागू हो )

(नाम, जपन कोड सजहत डाक पता, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर तथा लैंडलाइन नंबर)

(2) आजवष्कार का जववरण (i) आजवष्कार का िीषाक

(ii) आजवष्कार का िेत्र

ड्रॉप डाउन (कृजष-रसार्न, िैव प्रौद्योजगकी, रसार्न, खाद्य, िवा, कपड़ा, िैव

रसार्न, बहुलक प्रौद्योजगकी, सूक्ष्म िीव जवज्ञान, िैव जचदकत्सा इंिीजनर्ररंग, कृजष इंिीजनर्ररंग, पारंपररक ज्ञान िैव प्रौद्योजगकी, पारंपररक ज्ञान रसार्न र्ा कोई अन्द्र् सुसंगत िेत्र) (iii) आजवष्कार का सार/जववरण (एक सौ पचास िब्िों से अजधक नहीं)

(iv) उस पेिेंि कार्ाालर् का जववरण िहां आवेिक उि आजवष्कार के जलए पेिेंि आवेिन िार्र करना चाहता है [ ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू में डाले िाने वाले िेिों के नाम ] (v) क्र्ा वतामान आजवष्कार के जलए आि की तारीख तक भारत में र्ा भारत के बाहर कोई पेिेंि आवेिन िार्र दकर्ा गर्ा है

(vi) र्दि (v) का उत्तर 'हां' है, तो जववरण प्रिान दकर्ा िाए:
क्रम सं.
िेि का नाम [ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू] पेिेंि कार्ाालर् जिसमें आवेिन िार्र दकर्ा गर्ा है [ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू] पेिेंि आवेिन िाजखल करने की तारीख पेिेंि आवेिन संख्र्ा

3) आजवष्कार में उपर्ोग दकए गए/िावा दकए गए िैजवक संसाधन का ब् र्ौरा

क.
उपर्ोग दकए गए िैजवक संसाधन(ओं) की प्रकृजत (पौधे/पिु/सूक्ष्मिीव/कवक/िैवाल/अन्द्र्) [ड्रॉप डाउन] ख.
सामान्द् र् नाम ग.
वैज्ञाजनक नाम (िीनस और प्रिाजत/दकस्ट्म/उपभेि) घ.
पौधे के भाग (संपूणा पौधा, बीि, तना, छाल, पत्ती, फूल, फल, िड़, प्रकंि, आदि) ङ.
पहुंच का स्रोत (बाजार/व्यापारी/वन्द् र्/स्ट्वकृजष/भंडार/अन्द्र्) च.
भौगोजलक जस्ट्थजत (गांव, तालुका , जिला, राज्र्)। र्दि व्यापारी/इकाई से खरीिा गर्ा है, तो इकाई का नाम, पता और संपका जववरण प्रिान

दकर्ा िाना चाजहए। र्दि भंडार/इकाई से खरीिा गर्ा है, तो संग्रह दक स्ट् त्रोत प्रिान दकर्ा िाना चाजहए। (4) प्राप्त पारंपररक िानकारी का ब् र्ौरा, र्दि कोई हो (i) प्राप्त पारंपररक ज्ञान का जववरण (100 िब्िों से अजधक नहीं)

(ii) पारंपररक िानकारी धारक का नाम , (व्यजिगत समुिार्)

(iii) पारंपररक िानकारी धारक का पता (व्यजिगत/समुिार्)

(iv) दकसी अन्द्र् स्रोत से प्राप्त उससे संबंजधत पारंपररक ज्ञान

(5) अनुसंधान एवं जवकास संबंधी कार्ाकलाप में िाजमल दकसी भी संगठन का ब् र्ौरा

(6) कोई अन्द्र् िानकारी िो प्रासंजगक मानी िाए

(7) आवेिन िुल्क के प्रेषण का जववरण (भुगतान का तरीका, लेनिेन आईडी, राजि, तारीख, आदि)

घोषणा मैं/हम घोषणा करते हैं दक:
क. आवेिन पत्र में िी गई िानकारी मेरे/हमारे ज्ञान और जविास के अनुसार सत्र् एवं सही है तथा इसमें कुछ भी जछपार्ा नहीं गर्ा है तथा इसका कोई भी भाग असत् र् नहीं है। ख. मैं/हम दकसी भी गलत र्ा अनुजचत िानकारी के जलए उत् तरिार्ी होंगे। ग. अजधजनर्म की धारा 6(1ख) और जनर्म के जनर्म 16(3) के अनुसार पेिेंि के व्यावसार्ीकरण के समर् प्राजधकरण का पूवा अनुमोिन प्राप्त करूंगा/करेंगे। स्ट्थान हस्ट्तािर तारीख नाम {अजधजनर्म की धारा 6(1ख) एवं जनर्म 16(3)(क) िेखें}

अजधजनर्म की धारा 7 के अंतगात आने वाले व्यजिर्ों द्वारा बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकारों के व्यावसार्ीकरण के जलए राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण (रजिस्ट्रीकरण के बाि) से पूवा अनुमोिन प्राप्त करने के जलए आवेिन (1) आवेिक का जववरण (i) आवेिक की श्रेणी

(ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू) क. व् र्जष्ट/ व्यजष्टर्ों ख. व् र्जष्ट/व्यजष्टर्ों और इकाई (इकाईर्ां) ग. इकाई( इकाइर्ां) (ii) आवेिक का नाम (पेिेंि आवेिन के अनुसार)

(ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू)

क) भारतीर् ख) अजधजनर्म की धारा 7 के अंतगात आने वाली इकाई (iv) आवेिक का पता (जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक पता)

(v) व् र्जष्ट/संस्ट्था की प्रोफाइल

(vi) व्यवसार् की प्रकृजत (र्दि आवेिक एक इकाई है तो लागू)

(vii) प्राजधकृत प्रजतजनजध का जववरण (र्दि आवेिक कोई इकाई है तो लागू) (नाम, जपन कोड सजहत डाक पता, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर)

(viii) पेिेंि अिॉनी/व्यजि से संपका का जववरण (र्दि लागू हो) (नाम, जपन कोड सजहत डाक पता, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर)

(2) बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकार प्रिान करने से पहले राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण के साथ दकए गए पंिीकरण का जववरण (i) एनबीए रजिस्ट्रीकरण संख्र्ा

(ii) आजवष्कार का िीषाक

(iii) पेिेंि कार्ाालर्/िेिों का जववरण जिनमें आि की तारीख तक पेिेंि प्रिान दकए गए हैं (पेिेंि कार्ाालर् द्वारा िारी पेिेंि प्रमाण-पत्र की प्रजत अपलोड की िानी है ) [ड्रॉप डाउन में िाजमल िेिों की सूची]

(iv) भारतीर् पेिेंि कार्ाालर् में प्रस्ट्तुत नवीनतम प्रपत्र-27 की प्रजत अपलोड करें, र्दि कोई हो

(v) क्र्ा रजिस्ट्रीकरण में दिए गए िैजवक संसाधनों के जववरण तथा इस आवेिन में िी गई िैजवक संसाधनों की सूची एक ही है र्ा जभन्न है?
हां/नहीं

र्दि नहीं, तो नीचे दिए गए िैजवक संसाधनों का ब्र्ौरा प्रस्ट्तुत करें:
क. उपर्ोग दकए गए िैजवक संसाधन (संसाधनों) की प्रकृजत (पौधे/पिु/सूक्ष्मिीव/कवक/िैवाल/अन्द्र्) [ड्रॉप डाउन] ख. सामान्द् र् नाम

ग. वैज्ञाजनक नाम (िीनस और प्रिाजत/दकस्ट्म/उपभेि) घ. पौधे के भाग (संपूणा पौधा, बीि, तना, छाल, पत्ती, फूल, फल, िड़, प्रकंि, आदि) ङ. पहुंच का स्रोत (बािार/व्यापारी/ िंगली/स्ट्व-खेती/भंडार/अन्द्र्) च. भौगोजलक जस्ट्थजत (गांव, तालुका, जिला, राज्र्)। र्दि व्यापारी/संस्ट्थान से खरीिा गर्ा है, तो इकाई का नाम, पता और संपका जववरण प्रिान दकर्ा िाना चाजहए। र्दि भंडारण/संस्ट्थान से खरीिा गर्ा है, तो संग्रहण की उत्पजत्त का जववरण प्रिान दकर्ा िाना चाजहए। (3) व्यावसार्ीकरण का जववरण (i) प्रत्र्ेक िेि का जववरण िहां आजवष्कार का व्यावसार्ीकरण दकर्ा िाना है

i. िेि का नाम (ड्रॉप डाउन) ii. पेिेंि संख्र्ा iii. व्यावसार्ीकरण की रीजत (लाइसेंससंग/असाइनमेंि/स्ट्व-जनमााण/जविेष पेिेंि अजधकारों का अकेले हस्ट्तांतरण/कोई अन्द्र् रीजत) iv. प्रत्र्ेक लाइसेंसधारी/असाइनकताा /हस्ट्तांतररती/दकसी अन्द्र् व्यजि का जववरण (जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक पतों के साथ नाम) v. व्यावसार्ीकरण की अवजध (वषों में) vi. सृजित रािस्ट्व की राजि, र्दि कोई हो/सृजित होने की संभावना हो (4) कोई अन्द्र् िानकारी िो सुसंगत मानी िाए

(5) आवेिन िुल्क के प्रेषण का जववरण (भुगतान का तरीका, लेनिेन आईडी, राजि, तारीख, आदि)

घोषणा मैं/हम घोषणा करते हैं दक :

आवेिन पत्र में िी गई िानकारी मेरे/हमारे ज्ञान और जविास के अनुसार सत्र् एवं सही है तथा इसमें कुछ भी जछपार्ा नहीं गर्ा है तथा इसका कोई भी भाग झूठा नहीं है।

क.मैं/हम दकसी भी गलत र्ा अनुजचत िानकारी के जलए उत् तरिार्ी होंगे। ख.अजधजनर्म की धारा 7 के अनुसार वाजणजज्र्क उपर्ोग के जलए िैजवक संसाधन और/र्ा उससे संबद्ध पारंपररक ज्ञान तक पहुंचने के जलए संबंजधत राज्र् िैव जवजवधता बोडा र्ा संघ राज्र् िेत्र िैव जवजवधता पररषि को पूवा सूचना प्रिान की िाएगी।

स्ट्थान : हस्ट्तािर :
तारीख : नाम :

{अजधजनर्म की धारा 36क और जनर्म 18(1) िेखें} दकसी अन्द्र् िेि से प्राप्त िैजवक संसाधन(संसाधनों) और/र्ा संबद्ध पारंपररक ज्ञान के भारत में उपर्ोग की घोषणा संबंधी प्ररूप क्र.सं.
जववरण

(1) व्यजि र्ा संस्ट्था का नाम

(2) आवेिक की श्रेणी

क. व् र्जष्ट ख. व् र्जष्ट और इकाई ग. इकाई (3) आवेिक की जस्ट्थजत (ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू) क.
भारतीर् ख.
एनआरआई ग.
गैर-भारतीर् घ.
अजधजनर्म की धारा 3(2) के अंतगात आने वाली इकाई ङ.
अजधजनर्म की धारा 7 के अंतगात आने वाली इकाई (4) पूणा पता

(जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक पता)

(5) प्रर्ुि िैजवक संसाधन(संसाधनों) का जववरण

(i) िैजवक संसाधन का वैज्ञाजनक और सामान्द्र् नाम

(ii) वह िेि िहां से िैजवक संसाधन(संसाधनों) तक पहुंच बनाई गई थी

(iii) क्र्ा वह िेि जिससे िैजवक संसाधन प्राप्त दकए गए थे, नागोर्ा प्रोिोकॉल का पिकार है हां/नहीं (कृपर्ा िो भी लागू हो उसे जचजननत करें) (6) क्र्ा िैजवक संसाधन के मूल िेि के सिम राष्ट्रीर् प्राजधकारी का अनुमोिन प्राप्त दकर्ा गर्ा है

हां/नहीं [िेि की ड्रॉप डाउन सूची]

(i) अंतरााष्ट्रीर् स्ट्तर पर मान्द्र्ता प्राप्त अनुपालन प्रमाणपत्र के एबीएस-सीएच जवजिष्ट पहचानकताा का जववरण (र्दि उपलब्ध हो)।

(ii) र्दि अंतरराष्ट्रीर् स्ट्तर पर मान्द्र्ता प्राप्त अनुपालन प्रमाणपत्र उपलब्ध नहीं है, तो जनम्नजलजखत िानकारी प्रिान की िा सकती है

(क) िैजवक संसाधन का स्रोत

(ख) िैजवक संसाधन(संसाधनों) के उपर्ोग का उद्देश्र् i. अनुसंधान ii. वाजणजज्र्क उपर्ोग iii. बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकार प्राप्त करना iv. अन्द्र् (iii) िार्र दकए गए पेिेंि आवेिनों का जववरण, र्दि कोई हो घोषणा मैं/हम एतद्द्वारा घोषणा करते हैं दक मैंने/हमने उस िेि की पूवा सूजचत सहमजत और पारस्ट्पररक रूप से सहमत ितों के उपबंधों का अनुपालन दकर्ा है िहां से िैजवक संसाधन प्राप्त दकए गए हैं।

मैं/हम घोषणा करते हैं और सत्र्जनष्ा से पुजष्ट करते हैं दक ऊपर िी गई िानकारी मेरे ज्ञान के अनुसार सत्र् और सही है। स्ट्थान :
तारीख :

आवेिक के हस्ट्तािर

{अजधजनर्म की धारा 7 और जनर्म 19(1) िेखें} खेती की िाने वाली औषधीर् पौधों के जलए मूल प्रमाण पत्र प्राप्त करने संबंधी आवेिन सह प्रारूप (िैव जवजवधता प्रबंधन सजमजत द्वारा िारी दकर्ा िाएगा) जवजिष्ट पहचान संख्र्ा (बीएमसी द्वारा जवजनर्िाष्ट अल्फा संख्र्ात्मक) कोड: राज्र्/जिला/मंडल/तालुक/कस्ट्बा/गांव/बीएमसी/वषा/कंपनी का नाम/संख्र्ात्मक संख्र्ा

क्र.सं. जववरण : आवेिक द्वारा भरा िाना है (1) िैव जवजवधता प्रबंधन सजमजत का नाम :
...
(गांव र्ा िहर/जिला/राज्र्/संघ राज्र् िेत्र) (2) आवेिक का नाम :

(3) पूणा पता (जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक पता) :

(4) उपर्ोग की िाने वाली प्रिाजतर्ों और दकस्ट्मों का नाम :
क.
साधारण नाम ख.
वैज्ञाजनक नाम (िीनस और प्रिाजत/दकस्ट्म/उपभेि, (र्दि ज्ञात हो) ग.
पार्टसा (5) कृषक/दकसान का नाम :
(6) जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक पता :
(7) खेती र्ोग्र् िेत्र के भू-जनिेिांक :
(र्दि ज्ञात हो) (8) भूजम का सवेिण क्रमांक :

(9) औषधीर् पौधों की खेती के अंतगात िेत्रफल का जवस्ट्तार (एकड़ में) :

(10) उगाए िाने वाले औषधीर् पौधों की अनुमाजनत मात्रा जिसके जलए प्रमाण पत्र आवश्र्क है : (दकलोग्राम/कवंिल/िन/गठरी में )
- सूखा विन र्ा
-गीला विन (11) अनुमजत का उद्देश्र् :
(12) अनुमजत की अवजध : {...(माह) से...(माह) तक} (13) औषधीर् पौधों की कीमत (प्रजत दकलोग्राम /कवंिल/िन/गठरी) :

मैं/हम घोषणा करते हैं और सत्र्जनष्ा से प्रजतज्ञान करते हैं दक ऊपर िी गई िानकारी मेरे ज्ञान के अनुसार सत्र् एवं सही है।

स्ट्थान :

हस्ट्तािर :
तारीख :

नाम :
प्रमाणपत्र

र्ह प्रमाजणत दकर्ा िाता है दक कंपनी/ कारोबार/व् र्जष्ट/संस्ट्थान द्वारा दकए गए अनुरोध की सावधानीपूवाक िांच की गई है और औषधीर् पौधों का िेत्र में भौजतक सत्र्ापन दकर्ा गर्ा है। आवेिन पत्र में िी गई िानकारी िैव जवजवधता प्रबंधन सजमजत द्वारा रखी गई संबंजधत पुस्ट्तकों [पृष् संख्र्ा... क्रम संख्र्ा... तारीख...] से सत्र्ाजपत की गई है।

र्ह प्रमाजणत दकर्ा िाता है दक उपर्ुाि औषधीर् पौधे संवर्धात स्रोत से हैं और िैव जवजवधता (संिोधन) अजधजनर्म, 2023 की धारा 7, इन जनर्मों के जनर्म 19 के साथ परठत, के अंतगात जनधााररत मानिंडों को पूरा करते हैं। र्ह प्रमाण-पत्र िारी होने की तारीख से िो वषा तक वैध है।

तारीख :

(नाम) स्ट्थान :
बीएमसी के प्राजधकृत व्यजि के हस्ट्तािर

मुहर {अजधजनर्म की धारा 7 और जनर्म 19(4) िेखें}

िैव जवजवधता प्रबंधन सजमजत द्वारा संधाररत की िाने वाली औषधीर् पौधों की खेती के जववरण वाली पुस्ट्तक का प्रारूप

... िैव जवजवधता प्रबंधन सजमजत, ... पंचार्त/िहरी स्ट्थानीर् जनकार् (िहां भी लागू हो, बताएं दक क्र्ा र्ह िेत्र पंचार्तों का अनुसूजचत िेत्रों में जवस्ट्तार (पेसा) अजधजनर्म, 1996 के अंतगात आता है) क्र.सं.
दकसानों/व्यजिर्ों/इकाइर्ों का पूणा जववरण जिसमें डाक पता, मोबाइल, ई-मेल आदि िाजमल हैं। उस िेत्र की भौगोजलक जस्ट्थजत िहां खेती की िा रही है, जिसमें िेत्र का नाम, जवस्ट्तार, भू-जनिेिांक, खेती की अवजध आदि िाजमल हैं। खेती की िाने वाली औषधीर् पौधों का जववरण जिसमें सामान्द्र् और वानस्ट्पजतक नाम, खेती की अवजध, प्रजत हेक्िेर्र औसत उपि िाजमल है। मात्रा/ प्रमाण पत्र िारी होने से पहले उपलब्ध मात्रा, लगभग,

[1. गीला विन र्ा
2. सूखा विन]

वह मात्रा/आर्तन जिसके जलए वतामान प्रमाणपत्र िारी दकर्ा िा रहा है। [1. गीला विन र्ा
2. सूखा विन] वतामान प्रमाण पत्र िारी होने के बाि िेष मात्रा/आर्तन (किाई हेतु िेष िेत्र की सीमा सजहत) प्राप्तकताा का जववरण जिसमें समपूणा संपका जववरण, संग्रह का उद्देश्र् िाजमल है िारी दकर्े गर्े प्रमाण पत्र की जवजिष्ट पहचान संख्र्ा तथा तारीख िैव जवजवधता प्रबंधन सजमजत के सजचव र्ा मुख्र् कार्ाकारी अजधकारी द्वारा हस्ट्तािररत और िहरी स्ट्थानीर् जनकार् के अध्र्ि र्ा िैव जवजवधता प्रबंधन सजमजत के सिस्ट्र् द्वारा प्रजतहस्ट्तािररत

प्ररूप-13 {जनर्म 20(1) िेखें} भारतीर् िोधकतााओं/संस्ट्थाओं द्वारा गैर-वाजणजज्र्क अनुसंधान र्ा आपातकालीन उद्देश्र्ों के जलए अनुसंधान करने हेतु िैजवक संसाधनों को भारत से बाहर भेिने/ले िाने के जलए राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण की पूवा स्ट्वीकृजत प्राप्त करने के जलए आवेिन (1) आवेिक का जववरण (i) आवेिक की श्रेणी (ड्रॉप डाउन मेनू) (क) व् र्जष्ट िोधकताा (ख) संस्ट्थान (ii) आवेिक का नाम एवं पिनाम

(iii) आवेिक का पता (जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक पता)

(iv) संस्ट्थान का नाम

(2) भारत में संस्ट्थान का जववरण (i) संस्ट्थान का नाम

(ii) संस्ट्थान का पता (जपन कोड, ईमेल, मोबाइल और वैकजल्पक मोबाइल नंबर और/र्ा लैंडलाइन नंबर सजहत डाक पता)

(3) भारत में कार्ास्ट्थल पर पर्ावेिक र्ा संस्ट्थान प्रमुख का नाम (i) पर्ावेिक र्ा संस्ट्थान प्रमुख का नाम तथा पूरा पता

(ii) पर्ावेिक र्ा संस्ट्थान प्रमुख का पिनाम

(4) उस संस्ट्थान र्ा संगठन के पर्ावेिक र्ा प्रमुख का जववरण िो भारत के बाहर प्रस्ट्ताजवत अनुसंधान र्ा िैजवक संसाधनों के प्राप्तकताा का मागाििान करता है (i) श्रेणी (िैजवक संसाधन प्राप्त करने वाला व् र्जष्ट र्ा संस्ट्थान/संगठन र्ा व्यजि)

(ii) भारत के बाहर संस्ट्थान र्ा प्राप्तकताा के पर्ावेिक र्ा प्रमुख का नाम

(iii) संचार के जलए पूरा पता

(5) अनुसंधान को समथान िेने वाली जवत्त पोषण अजभकरण का नाम और जववरण, र्दि कोई हो (6) प्रस्ट्ताजवत अनुसंधान का जववरण (i) अनुसंधान का संजिप्त जववरण

(ii) अनुसंधान में जविेिी िोधकताा/संस्ट्था की भूजमका और भागीिारी, र्दि कोई हो

(iii) इस िोध से भारत और िोधकताा को होने वाले लाभ

(7) अनुसंधान के जलए साथ ले िाने र्ा भेिे िाने हेतु प्रस्ट्ताजवत िैजवक संसाधनों का जववरण (i) क. साधारण नाम ख. वैज्ञाजनक नाम ग. िैजवक संसाधन की प्रकृजत घ. पौधे के भाग (बीि, तना, छाल, पत्ती, फूल, फल, िड़, प्रकंि, आनुवंजिक सामग्री, अका, स्राव, आदि) ङ. मात्रा (संख्र्ा/िीिी/दकलोग्राम में) च. भौगोजलक जस्ट्थजत (गाुँव, तालुका, जिला, राज्र्)।
• र्दि व्यापारी/संस्ट्थान से खरीिा गर्ा है तो व्यापारी का नाम, पता और संपका जववरण प्रिान दकर्ा िाना चाजहए।
• र्दि संग्रह/संस्ट्थान से प्राप्त दकर्ा गर्ा है, तो संग्रह का उद्गम स्ट्थान बताना होगा। (ii) भारत के बाहर दकए िाने वाले अनुसंधान की अपेजित अवजध

(8) र्दि र्ह आपातकालीन उद्देश्र् के जलए है, तो कृपर्ा जववरण जनर्िाष्ट करें

घोषणा मैं, पुत्र/पुत्री/पत्नी/पजत...उम्र...जनवासी...स्ट्थार्ी पहचान पत्र संख्र्ा...(आधार काडा/पासपोिा आदि) के साथ घोषणा करता/करती हं दक ऊपर िी गई सभी िानकारी सही और सत्र् है।

मैं एतद्वारा पुजष्ट करता/करती हुँ दक िैजवक संसाधनों का उपर्ोग केवल आवेिन में बताए गए उद्देश्र्ों के जलए ही दकर्ा िाएगा।

मैं राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण की स्ट्वीकृजत के जबना अपने सहर्ोगी की सुजवधा/प्रर्ोगिाला में दकसी भी िैजवक संसाधन को साझा/प्रिान/भाग नहीं लूंगा/छोड़ूंगा।

मैं, अपने पर्ावेिक और सहर्ोगी के साथ, व्यजिगत रूप से और अलग-अलग घोषणा करता हं दक हम वाजणजज्र्क उपर्ोग नहीं करेंगे, न ही इस िोध में उपर्ोग दकए गए िैजवक संसाधनों और पारंपररक ज्ञान के आधार पर दकसी भी बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकार का िावा करेंगे।

र्दि ऐसी जस्ट्थजत उत्पन्न होती है, तो हम पूवा अनुमोिन प्राप्त करने के जलए राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण से जनवेिन करेंगे। इस दक्रर्ाकलाप से उत्पन्न होने वाले पररणाम, प्रदक्रर्ा, उत्पाि र्ा अन्द्र् पररणाम राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता

प्राजधकरण के साथ िोध के िौरान और उसके पूरा होने पर सुसंगत िस्ट्तावेिों और प्रकािनों की प्रजतर्ों के साथ साझा दकए िाएंगे।

हस्ट्तािर: ...
तारीख: ...
स्ट्थान: ...
पर्ावेिक/संस्ट्थान प्रमुख द्वारा घोषणा मैं, (संस्ट्थान का नाम) के रूप में कार्ारत हुँ तथा पुजष्ट करता हुँ दक श्री/डॉ/श्रीमती/सुश्री द्वारा प्रिान दकर्ा गर्ा जववरण सत्र् एवं सही है। तारीख: ...
स्ट्थान: ...
हस्ट्तािर: ...
पिनाम: ...
आजधकाररक मुहर : ...
प्राप्तकताा/सहर्ोगी द्वारा घोषणा मैं, (संस्ट्थान/संगठन का नाम) के रूप में कार्ारत हुँ, प्रजतज्ञान करता हुँ दक मैं र्ा मेरी संस्ट्थान/संगठन, ...
(संस्ट्थान का नाम) द्वारा भेिे गए र्ा श्री/डॉ./श्रीमती/सुश्री... द्वारा लाए िा रहे िैजवक संसाधनों का उपर्ोग आवेिन में बताए गए प्रर्ोिनों के जलए दकर्ा िाएगा और अध्र्र्न पूरा होने के बाि उि िैजवक संसाधनों को पूणा रूप से नष्ट कर दिर्ा िाएगा र्ा अध्र्र्न पूरा होने पर िैजवक संसाधनों को र्थाजस्ट्थजत उस संस्ट्थान को वापस भेि दिर्ा िाएगा िहां से िैजवक संसाधन प्राप्त दकए गए थे, र्ा िैसा राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण द्वारा जवजनश्चर् दकर्ा िाए। मैं, र्ा जिस संस्ट्थान से मैं संबद्ध हं, तत्काल आवेिन के अधीन दकसी भी स्ट्वाजमत्व का िावा नहीं करूंगा और न ही आवेिक, संबद्ध संस्ट्थान और राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण की पूवा स्ट्वीकृजत के जबना िैजवक संसाधनों, व्युत्पन्नों र्ा अन्द्र् ऐसे घिकों पर दकसी भी बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकार का िावा करूंगा। हस्ट्तािर:...
पिनाम...
आजधकाररक मुहर...

प्ररूप-14 (अजधजनर्म की धारा 50 एवं जनर्म-22(1) िेखें) अपील ज्ञापन का प्ररूप पर्ाावरण, वन और िलवार्ु पररवतान मंत्रालर्, नई दिल्ली के समि र्ा राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण (र्थाजस्ट्थजत) (िैव जवजवधता अजधजनर्म, 2002 की धारा 50 के अंतगात अपील का ज्ञापन)

अपील संख्र्ा 20

अपीलकताा बनाम

प्रजतवािी (र्थाजस्ट्थजत,र्हां प्राजधकरण/बोडा/पररषि का नाम और जववरण, उल्लेख करें) अपीलकताा जनम्नजलजखत तथ्र्ों और आधारों पर प्रजतवािी द्वारा पाररत तारीख के आिेि के जवरुद्ध अपील का र्ह ज्ञापन प्रस्ट्तुत करना चाहता है:

1. तथ्र्:
(र्हां मामले के तथ्र्ों का संिेप में उल्लेख दकर्ा गर्ा है):

2. पृष्भूजम:

(र्हां उन आधारों का उल्लेख करें जिन पर अपील की िा रही है):
i.) ii.) iii.)

3. मांगी गई राहत:
i) ii) iii)

4. र्ाजचका:
क) उपरोि िी गई िानकारी के आलोक में, अपीलकताा सािर र्ाचना करता है दक प्रजतवािी के आिेि/जनणार् को रद्द/रद्द दकर्ा िाए। ख) प्रजतवािी द्वारा तैर्ार की गई नीजत/दििाजनिेि/जवजनर्मों को िाए सीमा तक रद्द/संिोजधत/जनरस्ट्त दकर्ा

अपीलकताा के हस्ट्तािर मुहर सजहत पता:
स्ट्थान:
तारीख:

सत्र्ापन मैं अपीलकताा, र्ह घोषणा करता हुँ दक उपरोि सूचना मेरे पूणा िानकारी और जविास के अनुसार सत्र् है। दिनांकको सत्र्ाजपत।

अपीलकताा के हस्ट्तािर मुहर सजहत पता अपीलकताा के अजधकृत प्रजतजनजध के हस्ट्तािर

संलग्नक: 1. उस आिेि/जनिेि/नीजत जवजनजश्चर् की प्रमाजणत प्रजत अपलोड करें जिसके जवरुद्ध अपील की गई है।

प्ररूप-15 {अजधजनर्म की धारा 50 और जनर्म 22(4) िेखें} सुनवाई के जलए उपजस्ट्थत होने हेतु नोरिस का प्रारूप

पर्ाावरण, वन और िलवार्ु पररवतान मंत्रालर्, नई दिल्ली के समि

र्ा

राष्ट्रीर् िैव जवजवधता प्राजधकरण (र्थाजस्ट्थजत)

अपील संख्र्ा 20

अपीलकताा बनाम

प्रजतवािी के बीच में :
सूचना कृपर्ा ध्र्ान िें दक अपीलकताा द्वारा आिेि/जनिेि/नीजत जवजनजश्चर् (जववरण िें) के जवरुद्ध िार्र की गई उपरोि अपील की सुनवाई तारीख को बिे जनर्त की गई है। अपील के साथ िार्र अपील ज्ञापन और अन्द्र् अनुलग्नकों की प्रजतर्ां आपके संिभा के जलए संलग्न हैं।

कृपर्ा ध्र्ान िें दक र्दि आप अपील की सुनवाई की उि जतजथ (र्ा बाि में जनर्त की गई अन्द्र् तारीख) पर उपजस्ट्थत होने में असफल रहते हैं, तो अपील का अंजतम रूप से एकपिीर् जनपिारा कर दिर्ा िाएगा। अपीलीर् प्राजधकारी की ओर से अजधकृत हस्ट्तािरकताा (सील) तारीख:
स्ट्थान :
प्ररूप-16 {अजधजनर्म की धारा 61(ख) और जनर्म 24(19)(ख) िेखें} दकसी व्यजि/लाभ िावेिार द्वारा नोरिस का प्रारूप पावती सजहत रजिस्ट् री डाक द्वारा श्री

द्वारा

सेवा में,

जवषर्: िैव जवजवधता अजधजनर्म, 2002 की धारा 61(ख) के अंतगात नोरिस चूंदक िैजवक जवजवधता अजधजनर्म, 2002 के अंतगात अपराध ... द्वारा दकर्ा गर्ा है/दकर्ा िा रहा है।
2. मैं/हम िैव जवजवधता अजधजनर्म, 2002 की धारा 61(ख) के अंतगात तीस दिन का नोरिस िेता हुँ/िेते हैं दक मैं/हम अजधजनर्म के उपबंधों के उल्लंघन के जलए ... के जवरुद्ध न्द्र्ार्ालर् में जिकार्त ििा कराने का आिर् रखते हैं।

3. मेरे/हमारे नोरिस के समथान में, मैं/हम साक्ष्र् के रूप में जनम्नजलजखत िस्ट्तावेि संलग्न कर रहे हैं:
1...
2...
3...

स्ट्थान:
तारीख:
हस्ट्तािर

स्ट्पष्टीकरण:
(1) र्दि नोरिस दकसी कंपनी के नाम से दिर्ा िाना है, तो कंपनी की ओर से नोरिस पर हस्ट्तािर करने के जलए व्यजि को अजधकृत करने वाला िस्ट्तावेिी साक्ष्र् नोरिस के साथ संलग्न दकर्ा िाएगा।

(2) कजथत िोषी का नाम और पता दिर्ा िाना चाजहए। प्राजधकरण की मंिूरी के जबना िैजवक संसाधन/पारंपररक ज्ञान/अनुसंधान/िैव सवेिण और िैव उपर्ोग/बौजद्धक संपिा अजधकार/पेिेंि प्राप्त करने के मामले में, इसका ब्र्ौरा और वाजणजज्र्क उपर्ोग, र्दि कोई हुआ है, प्रस्ट्तुत दकर्ा िाना चाजहए।

(3) कजथत उल्लंघन/िोष की िांच करने के जलए िस्ट्तावेिी साक्ष्र् में फोिोग्राफ, तकनीकी ररपोिा आदि िाजमल होंगे।

[फा. सं. सीएस-सी12018/3/2020-सीएस-III] रघु कुमार कोडाली, वैज्ञाजनक 'िी',

MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, FOREST AND CLIMATE CHANGE NOTIFICATION New Delhi, the 22nd October, 2024

G.S.R. 665(E).—In exercise of the powers conferred by section 62 of the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 (18 of 2003) and in supersession of the Biological Diversity Rules, 2004, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before such supersession, the Central Government hereby makes the following rules, namely: -
1. Short title and commencement. – (1) These rules may be called the Biological Diversity Rules, 2024.

(2) They shall come into force on expiry of sixty days from the date of their notification in the Official Gazette.
2. Definitions. – (1) In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires, - (a) “Act” means the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 (18 of 2003);
(b) “Authority” means the National Biodiversity Authority established under sub-section (1) of section 8 of the Act;
(c) "Adjudicating Officer" means any officer appointed under section 55A of the Act;
(d) “Biodiversity Management Committee” means a Biodiversity Management Committee established under sub-section (1) of section 41 of the Act;
(e) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Authority;
(f) “fee” means any fee as specified in the First Schedule to these rules;
(g) “Form” means a Form specified under the Second Schedule to these rules;
(h) “Member” means a member of the Authority and includes the Chairperson and the Member Secretary;
(i) “Member-Secretary” means a full time Secretary of the Authority, or of the State Biodiversity Board or of the Union territory Biodiversity Council, as the case may be.

(2) Words and expressions used but not defined in these rules and defined in the Act shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Act.
3. Manner of selection and appointment of Chairperson.– (1) The Chairperson shall be appointed by the Central Government.
(2) Every appointment of Chairperson under sub-rule (1) shall be made either on deputation basis including short-term contract or by selection from outside the Government and incase, the appointment is through deputation from the Government or a short-term contract, the applicant shall not be below the rank of Additional Secretary to the Government of India.
4. Term of office of the Chairperson.– (1)The Chairperson shall hold office for a term of three years’ from the date of publication of appointment and shall be eligible for re-appointment:
Provided that no Chairperson shall hold office as such after he attains the age of sixty-five years or his term of office expires whichever is earlier.
(2) The Chairperson may resign from the office by giving one-month notice in writing to the Central Government.
5. Pay and allowances.– (1) A Chairperson shall be entitled to a pay equivalent to that of a Secretary to the Government of India.
(2) In case, a retired person is appointed as Chairperson, pay shall be fixed in accordance with the extant orders of the Central Government as applicable to such persons.
(3) A Chairperson shall be entitled to such allowances, leave, pension, provident fund, medical facilities, rent free accommodation or house rent allowance, other perquisites, as are admissible to the officers of the Central Government of equivalent rank.
6. Term of office and allowances of non-official Members.– (1) Every non-official member shall hold office for a term not exceeding three years at a time from the date of publication of appointment of such member in the Official Gazette.
(2) Every non-official member attending the meeting of the Authority shall be entitled to sitting allowance, travelling expenses, daily allowance and such other allowances as are applicable to non-official member of Commissions and Committees of the Central Government attending the meetings of such Commission or Committee.
7. Filling of vacancies of non-official Members.– (1) A non–official member may resign from office at any time by giving one month notice in writing addressed to the Central Government under intimation to the Chairperson.
(2) On acceptance of the resignation by the Central Government or on the expiry of the period of notice, the seat of that member in the Authority shall become vacant.
(3) A casual vacancy of a non–official member shall be filled up by a fresh nomination and the person nominated to fill the vacancy shall hold office only for the remainder of the term of the member in whose place such member was nominated.
8. Removal of the Members.– No Member shall be removed from office on any ground specified in section 11 of the Act, without conducting an inquiry by the Central Government and without giving such member a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
9. Member-Secretary.– (1) The Central Government shall appoint a Member-Secretary to the Authority.
(2) The Member-Secretary shall be entitled to pay equivalent to that of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India.
(3) The terms and conditions of appointment of the Member-Secretary shall be determined by the Central Government.
(4) The Member-Secretary shall be responsible for convening the meetings of the Authority, maintenance of the records of the proceedings of the Authority and such other matters as may be assigned to him by the Authority or by the Chairperson.
(5) The Member-Secretary shall be in-charge of all the papers and records of the Authority and shall be responsible for their safe custody.
(6) All directions, resolutions, orders and instructions issued by the Authority generally shall be under the seal and signature of the Member-Secretary or any other officer authorised by the Chairperson in this behalf.
10. Meetings of Authority.– (1) The Authority shall meet at least once in three months in a year at the Headquarters of the Authority or at such place as may be decided by the Chairperson.
(2) The Chairperson shall, upon a written request from not less than six members of the Authority or upon a direction of the Central Government, call a special meeting of the Authority.

(3) The members shall be given at least fifteen days’ notice for holding an ordinary meeting and at least three days’ notice for holding a special meeting specifying the purpose, the time and the place at which such meeting is to be held:
Provided that the Chairperson may authorise convening an emergency meeting of the Authority by giving a short notice to the members for considering and taking decisions on urgent matters.
(4) Every meeting shall be presided over by the Chairperson and in the absence of the Chairperson, a presiding officer to be elected in the presence of Member-Secretary from amongst the members present.
(5) The decisions of the Authority at a meeting shall, if necessary, be taken by a simple majority of the members present and voting and the Chairperson or in absence of the Chairperson, the member presiding shall have a second or casting vote.
(6) Each member including the Member-Secretary shall have one vote.
(7) The quorum at every meeting of the Authority shall be seven.
(8) A member shall be entitled to bring forward any matter for the consideration of the Authority in its meeting of which he has given ten days’ notice or the Chairperson in his discretion permits to do so.
(9) Notice of the meeting may be given to the members by the Member-Secretary of the Authority electronically or in such other manner as deemed fit in the circumstances of the case.
11. General functions of Authority. – The Authority may,- (a) administer the National Biodiversity Fund;
(b) sanction grants to the State Biodiversity Boards or Union territory Biodiversity Councils and Biodiversity Management Committees for specific purposes;
(c) decide on the format and contents of the mutually agreed terms of the various agreements to be executed between the parties embodying the approvals of the Authority;
(d) provide technical and legal advice, clarifications and guidance to the State Biodiversity Boards or Union territory Biodiversity Councils for implementing the provisions of the Act;
(e) coordinate the activities of the State Biodiversity Boards and the Union territory Biodiversity Councils;
(f) specify the electronic and/ or manual formats of the People’s Biodiversity Register and lay down the procedure for documentation of information related to biodiversity, its periodic updating, securely maintaining it in an electronic or digitised form and for sharing of such information;
(g) develop databases and documentation systems for biological resources and traditional knowledge associated thereto through People’s Biodiversity Registers in a given geographical area;
(h) provide guidance and technical support to the Biodiversity Management Committees through the State Biodiversity Board or Union territory Biodiversity Council or directly, if required for preparation, validation and maintenance of Biodiversity Registers;
(i) report to the Central Government about the functioning of the Authority and implementation of the Act;
(j) inspect any area and examine documents in connection with the implementation of the Act;
(k) collect, compile and publish technical and statistical data, manuals, codes or guides relating to biodiversity including conservation, sustainable use of its components, and fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the use of biological resources and knowledge associated thereto;
(l) sponsor studies, research, investigations, projects, workshops, seminars, conferences, etc., to achieve the objectives of the Act;
(m) create awareness and organise training and capacity building programmes for all stakeholders including the line departments and academic, scientific and research institutions for achieving the objectives of the Act;
(n) prepare the annual budget, maintain proper accounts and other relevant records, and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form, as may be prescribed by the Central Government;
(o) frame regulations governing the recruitment and conditions of service of the officials of the Authority;
(p) engage consultants and advisors, for a specific period, not exceeding three years, for providing assistance to the Authority for the effective discharge of its functions:

Provided that if it is necessary and expedient to engage any consultant or advisor beyond a period of three years, the Authority shall seek prior approval of the Central Government.
(q) recommend creation of posts, periodic revision of recruitment rules, pay and allowances and terms and conditions of service to the Central Government for effective discharge of the functions by the Authority;
(r) function as a Competent National Authority for the purposes of Nagoya Protocol on access to genetic resources and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from their utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity;
(s) adjudicate the disputes of State Biodiversity Boards and Union territory Biodiversity Councils as referred to by the Central Government;
(t) lay down model guidelines for adjudicating disputes of the Biodiversity Management Committees by the State Biodiversity Boards or Union territory Biodiversity Councils;
(u) develop procedures, in consultation with the State Biodiversity Boards or Union territory Biodiversity Councils, National Medicinal Plants Board, or any other authority as deemed appropriate, for seeking exemption under sub-section (1) of section 7 of the Act on production of a certificate of origin of cultivated medicinal plants;
(v) suggest guidelines for framing rules by the State Government or Union territory Administration for conservation and management of the areas of biodiversity importance notified as biodiversity heritage sites;
(w) formulate model guidelines for collection of fee by the Biodiversity Management Committees for accessing biological resources from their jurisdiction;
(x) facilitate the Biodiversity Management Committees, whenever necessary, for providing prior informed consent by the local communities for access to biological resources and the traditional knowledge associated thereto;
(y) develop a online Information Technology portal for the discharge of its various functions under the Act in a transparent and accountable manner.
12. Powers and duties of Chairperson. – (1) The Chairperson shall have overall control of the day-to-day activities of the Authority.
(2) The Chairperson shall have the powers of general superintendence over the officials of the Authority and issuing necessary directions for the conduct and management of the functions of the Authority.
(3) The Chairperson, either directly or through the Member-Secretary or any other officer of the Authority authorised for the purpose, may sanction and disburse all payments against the approved budget.
(4) The Chairperson shall have powers for granting administrative, financial and technical sanctions to all the proposals.
(5) The Authority may delegate any of its power under section 16 of the Act to the Member-Secretary or to any officer of the Authority not below the rank of a Section Officer in the Government of India.
(6) The Chairperson shall take all necessary measures for the implementation of all decisions taken by the Authority in proper manner.
(7) In case of any present and imminent emergency situations like epidemics and pandemics particularly those that threaten, or damage human, animal or plant health as determined at national and international level, the Chairperson may exercise the powers of the Authority for granting expeditious approvals and shall place all such approvals before the next meeting of the Authority for approval.
(8) The Chairperson shall exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be delegated to him by the Authority or the Central Government from time to time.
13. Procedure for access to biological resources and knowledge associated thereto. – (1) Any person, referred to in sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Act, seeking approval of the Authority for access to biological resources and knowledge associated thereto for research or for bio-survey and bio-utilisation shall make an application on the web portal of the Authority in Form 1, and for commercial utilisation shall make an application on the web portal of the Authority in Form 2.
(2) Any person, referred to in sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Act, who was in possession of a biological resource before the coming into force of the Biological Diversity (Amendment) Act, 2023, shall seek approval of the Authority for the purpose of research, commercial utilisation, bio-survey and bio-utilisation.
(3) Every application under sub-rule (1) shall be accompanied with a specified fee paid in the form of electronic transfer or digital payment to the National Biodiversity Fund.

(4) The Authority may, after consultation with the Biodiversity Management Committee either directly or through State Biodiversity Board or Union territory Biodiversity Council, and after collecting such additional information from the applicant and other sources, as required, and based on the merits of the application, may grant approval subject to terms and conditions, including benefit sharing, or reject, as deemed fit within a period of ninety days from the receipt of the application in complete form:
Provided that if the requisite information sought by the Authority has not been made available by the applicant within a period of thirty days from the date of seeking information, the application shall be closed and applicant shall be informed about the closure:
Provided further that the Biodiversity Management Committee before conveying its views to the Authority, may consult, wherever required, the community, individual or entity concerned to whom the bio-resource belongs to, as the case may be, to ensure their prior informed consent:
Provided also that in cases of present or imminent emergencies situation, the Authority shall process the application expeditiously.
(5) The approval to access shall be in the form of an agreement on mutually agreed terms duly signed by an authorised officer of the Authority and the applicant:
Provided that the application is deemed to be closed, if the applicant does not sign the agreement within a period of sixty days from the date of communication of the draft agreement by the Authority, upon intimation to the applicant:
Provided further that such closed application may be revived on receipt of payment of the half of the fee specified for fresh application under sub–rule (3) within a period of ninety days.
(6) The Authority may for reasons to be recorded in writing, reject an application if it considers that the request cannot be acceded to:
Provided that the application shall not be rejected unless the applicant has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(7) The Authority shall publicise all the approvals granted or rejected on its website and shall also ensure that such information is shared with other agencies, as may be required.
(8) The compliance with the terms and conditions of the agreement shall be monitored by the Authority by involving State Biodiversity Board or Union territory Biodiversity Council, Biodiversity Management Committee or any other agency as deemed appropriate by the Authority.
14. Restricting access to biological resources and knowledge associated with such biological resources. –(1)The Authority after conducting such enquiry as deemed appropriate in respect of any provisions of this rule, shall take steps to restrict or prohibit access to biological resources or knowledge associated with such biological resources for the following reasons, namely:- (a) the request for access is for any threatened and/ or endemic species including those notified under section 38 of the Act;
(b) the request for access may result in an adverse impact on the livelihood and/ or socio-cultural aspects of the local communities;
(c) the request for access may result in adverse environmental impact(s)which may be difficult to control and mitigate;
(d) the request for access may cause genetic erosion or affect the ecosystem functions including in the areas notified under section 37 of the Act;
(e) the request is for the use of resources for purposes contrary to national interest and other related international agreements entered into by India;
(f) for any other reasons to be recorded in writing.

(2) Notwithstanding sub–rule (1), the Authority may permit access to cultivated species mentioned under clause (a) to (e) of that sub-rule depending on merits of each case for a specific period.
15. Procedure for seeking approval for sharing or transferring results of research to persons covered under subsection (2) of section 3 of the Act.– (1) Any person who intends to share or transfer any result of the research relating to biological resources or traditional knowledge associated thereto to persons covered under sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Act shall make an application on the web portal of the Authority in the following Forms, namely :-

(a) Form 3 for seeking prior approval of the Authority by any person for sharing or transferring the results of research to persons covered under sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Act for commercial purposes or otherwise;
(b) Form 4 for registration by the transferee (persons covered under sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Act) to use the results of research for further research;
(c) Form 5 for seeking prior approval of the Authority to use the results of research for commercial utilisation by the transferee (persons covered under sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Act);
(d) Form 6 for seeking prior approval of the Authority to use the results of research for obtaining intellectual property rights by the transferee (persons covered under sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Act).
(2) Every application under sub–rule (1) shall be accompanied by a fee paid in an electronic transfer or digital payment form to the National Biodiversity Fund.
(3) The Authority after collecting such additional information from the applicant and other sources, as required, and based on the merits of the application, may grant approval subject to such terms and conditions including benefit sharing, or reject, as deemed fit, within a period of ninety days for receipt of the application under sub-rule (1):
Provided that if the requisite information sought by the Authority has not been made available by the applicant within a period of thirty days from the date of seeking information, the application shall be closed and the applicant shall be informed about the closure.
Provided that the application shall not be rejected unless the applicant has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(4) The approvals referred under this rule shall be granted in the form of an agreement on mutually agreed terms duly signed by an authorised officer of the Authority and the applicant:
Provided that the application is deemed to be closed, if the applicant does not sign the agreement within a period of sixty days from the date of communication of the draft agreement by the Authority, upon intimation to the applicant:
Provided further that such closed application may be revived on receipt of payment of half of the fee specified for fresh application under sub–rule (2) within a period of ninety days.

(5) If the Authority is of the opinion that activities referred to in the registration made under clause(b) of sub-rule (1) are detrimental or contrary to the objectives of the Act, it may by order, prohibit or restrict any such activity.
(6) The applicant so registered with the Authority under clause (b) sub-rule (1) shall submit periodic status report as may be required by the Authority.
16. Procedure for registration and obtaining prior approval from Authority before grant of intellectual property rights.– (1) Procedure for seeking prior approval before grant of intellectual property rights by any person referred to in sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Act shall be as follows, namely:- (a) Any person referred to in sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Act, applying for any intellectual property rights, in or outside India by applying on the web portal of the Authority in Form 7, for any invention based on research or information including digital sequence information on biological resource which is accessed from India, including those deposited in repositories outside India, or traditional knowledge associated thereto, shall seek prior approval of the Authority, before grant of intellectual property rights, by the competent authority in India or elsewhere;
(b) every application under clause (a) shall be accompanied with a specified fee paid in the form of electronic transfer or digital payment to the National Biodiversity Fund;
(c) the Authority shall, after collecting such additional information from the applicant and other sources as deemed appropriate, and on being satisfied with the merits of the application, take a decision on granting approval or otherwise within a period of one hundred and eighty days from the date of receipt of application or on receipt of requisite information whichever is later, subject to such terms and conditions including benefit sharing, as it may deem fit:

Provided that the application shall be closed if the requisite information sought by the Authority has not been made available by the applicant within a period of ninety days from the date of seeking information and the applicant shall be informed about such closure.

(d) the approval shall be granted in the form of an agreement on mutually agreed terms duly signed by an authorised officer of the Authority and the applicant:

Provided that the application shall be deemed to be closed, if the applicant does not sign the agreement within a period of ninety days from the date of communication of the draft agreement by the Authority, upon intimation to the applicant:
Provided further that such closed application may be revived on receipt of payment of the half of the fee prescribed for submitting fresh application under clause (b) of sub–rule 1 within a period of ninety days.
(e) the applicant shall intimate the Authority within forty five days from the date of the grant of the intellectual property rights, failing which action as deemed fit will be taken by the competent authority;
(f) the Authority, for reasons to be recorded in writing, may reject an application if it considers that the request cannot be acceded to:

Provided that the application shall not be rejected unless the applicant has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(2) Procedure for registration before obtaining intellectual property rights by any person referred to under section 7 of the Act shall be as follows, namely:- (a) any person referred to in under section 7 of the Act, applying for any intellectual property rights, in or outside India, shall register on the web portal of the Authority in Form 8, for any invention based on research or information including digital sequence information on biological resource which is accessed from India, including those deposited in repositories outside India, or traditional knowledge associated thereto, before grant of such intellectual property rights by the competent authority in India or abroad;
(b) every application under clause (a) for registration with the Authority, shall be accompanied by a specified fee in the form of electronic transfer or digital payment to the National Biodiversity Fund;
(c) if the Authority is of the opinion that such an invention is the result of access to the knowledge held by a community or an individual or a group of individuals in an illegal manner, the Authority may recommend to the adjudicating officer to impose higher penalty with regard to damage and also value assessed or realised, as the case may be;
(d) the applicant shall intimate the Authority within forty five days of the grant of the intellectual property rights;
(e) the applicant at the time of registration shall give an undertaking that prior approval of the Authority will be taken before commercialisation of the intellectual property rights.
(3) Procedure for obtaining prior approval of the Authority for commercialisation of the intellectual property rights by any person referred to in under section 7 of the Act shall be as follows:
(a) at the time of commercialisation of the intellectual property rights referred to under clause (e) of sub-rule(2), the applicant shall obtain prior approval by applying on the web portal of the Authority in Form 9.
(b) every application under clause (a) shall be accompanied by a specified fee paid in the form of electronic transfer or digital payment to the National Biodiversity Fund;
(c) the Authority shall, after collecting such additional information from the applicant and other sources as deemed appropriate, and on being satisfied with the merits of the application, take a decision on granting approval or otherwise within a period of one hundred and eighty days days from the date of receipt of application or on receipt of requisite information whichever is later, subject to such terms and conditions including benefit sharing, as it may deem fit;
(d) the approval shall be granted in the form of an agreement on mutually agreed terms duly signed by an authorised officer of the Authority and the applicant:
Provided that the application is deemed to be closed if the applicant does not sign the agreement within a period of ninety days from the date of communication of the draft agreement by the Authority to the applicant:
Provided further that such closed application may be revived on receipt of payment of the half of the fee specified for fresh application under clause 3(b) within a period of ninety days.
17. Revocation of access or approval.- (1) The Authority may either on the basis of a complaint or suo moto withdraw the approvals granted under rules 13, 15, sub-rule(1) and (3) of rule 16 and rule 20 revoke the agreement or any part thereof, after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the applicant, under the following conditions, namely: -

(i) on the basis of reasonable belief that the person to whom the approval was granted has declared false or misleading information or violated any of the provisions of the Act or the conditions on which the approval was granted;
(ii) when the person who has been granted approval has failed to comply with any of the terms and conditions of the agreement;
(iii) in the larger public interest or for the protection of environment and conservation of biological diversity, or on the basis of new facts or information brought to the notice of the Authority.
(2) The Authority shall forward a copy of every order of revocation to the State Biodiversity Board and Union territory Biodiversity Council and the Biodiversity Management Committee concerned for prohibiting the access and also to assess the damage caused, if any, and to take steps to recover the damages.
18. Measures for monitoring and regulating the use in India of biological resource or associated traditional knowledge obtained from any foreign country.- (1) Any person who intends to use in India the biological resource or traditional knowledge associated thereto obtained from any foreign country for research or for commercial purpose or for obtaining intellectual property rights, shall submit a declaration in Form 10 on the web portal of the Authority, as per the provisions of the Section 36(A) of the Act.
(2) The Authority, as per the provisions of the Section 36(A) of the Act, after obtaining relevant information from the user of such biological resource or traditional knowledge associated thereto, shall notify the same on the Access and Benefit-Sharing Clearing-House of the Convention on Biological Diversity.
(3) Based on the request of the provider country, the Authority, as per the provisions of the Section 36(A) of the Act, shall take appropriate measures on such use.
19. Procedure for obtaining a certificate of origin for cultivated medicinal plants. – (1) Any person referred to in under section 7 of the Act, who intends to claim an exemption for accessing cultivated medicinal plants under subsection (2) of section 7, shall submit self-declaration in physical or digital form to obtain a certificate of origin from the Biodiversity Management Committee concerned in Form 11.
(2) The self-declaration referred to in sub-rule (1) shall contain details including the name and address of the applicant and the cultivator, geographical location including survey number, extent of area under cultivation along with the details of the species being cultivated and parts thereof, and approximate quantity of the biological resources being accessed.
(3) The application shall be accompanied with a specified fee paid in the form of electronic transfer or digital payment to the Local Biodiversity Fund.
(4) The Biodiversity Management Committee, based on the application submitted by the applicant including the cultivation and post-harvest details of the medicinal plants, and the entries made in the books maintained in Format 12, shall issue the certificate of origin of the cultivated medicinal plants referred to under sub-section (3) of section 7 of the Act and sub-rule (1) within a period of fifteen days:
Provided that if the certificate of origin is not issued within a period of fifteen days, the applicant shall approach the State Biodiversity Board concerned and the same may be disposed of within a period of seven days:
Provided further that in the case of any dispute between the applicant, Biodiversity Management Committee or State Biodiversity Board concerned, the same shall be referred to the Authority by the State Biodiversity Board concerned, and in such case, the decision of the Authority shall be final.
(5) For claiming exemption under sub-section (2) of section 7 of the Act, the onus of proof of source of origin of the medicinal plants shall lie on the end-user.
20. Procedure for conducting non-commercial research or research for emergency purposes outside India by Indian researcher or institution.- (1) Any Indian researcher or institution who intends to carry or send the biological resource outside India to undertake non-commercial research including carrying out urgent studies to address certain present or imminent emergencies like epidemics, shall apply on the web portal of the Authority in Form 13 :
Provided that in case the traditional knowledge associated thereto is also to be transferred or carried along with the biological resources, the approval of the Authority shall be taken by the concerned foreign institution under rule 13.
(2) Every application under sub-rule (1) shall be accompanied with a specified fee paid in the form of electronic transfer or digital payment to the National Biodiversity Fund.
(3) The Authority shall, on being satisfied with the application under sub-rule (1), grant its approval within a period of forty five days from the date of receipt of the application.

(4) On receipt of approval of the Authority under sub-rule (3), the applicant shall deposit voucher specimens in the designated national repositories, wherever required, before carrying or sending the biological resource outside India and a copy of proof of such deposits shall be endorsed to the Authority.
21. Management and utilisation of National Biodiversity Fund.- (1) The National Biodiversity Fund shall be operated by the Chairperson or by such other officer of the Authority as may be authorised in this regard.
(2) The National Biodiversity Fund shall have two separate accounts, one relating to clause (a) of sub-section 1 of section 27 and the other under clause (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) of the Act which shall be utilised for the activities referred from sub-section (2) of section 27, as decided by the Authority.
(3) All receipts including monetary benefits accrued shall be deposited in the National Biodiversity Fund.
(4) The benefit sharing that is to be earmarked for the Authority, State Biodiversity Boards or Union territory Biodiversity Council may range from minimum of ten percent to maximum of fifteen percent as the case may be and rest may be transferred to benefit claimers or for other uses when benefit claimers are not identified.
(5) The Authority may specify measures for monitoring the utilisation of the Fund.
22. Appeal for settlement of disputes under section 50 of the Act.– (1) If a dispute arises between the Authority and a State Biodiversity Board or Union territory Biodiversity Council or Boards and Councils in respect of implementation of any order or direction or on any policy decision, either of the aggrieved parties or the Authority or the Board or the Council, as the case may be, may prefer an appeal under section 50 of the Act in Form 14, to the Central Government.
(2) In case of a dispute between a State Biodiversity Board or Union territory Biodiversity Council and another Board or Council or among Boards or Councils, the Central Government, may refer the same to the Authority for resolution.
(3) The memorandum of appeal shall be accompanied by an authenticated copy of the order, direction or policy decision, as the case may be, by which the appellant is aggrieved and shall be submitted online, within thirty days from the date of the order, direction or policy decision:
Provided that if the Central Government is satisfied that there was a good and sufficient ground for the delay in preferring the appeal, it may, for reason to be recorded in writing, allow the appeal to be preferred after the expiry of the aforesaid period of thirty days.
(4) The notice for hearing the appeal shall be given on the web portal of the Authority in Form 15.
(5) Where a dispute is referred to the Authority under sub-rule (2), the Authority shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and as far as practicable, and follow the same procedure which the Central Government is required to follow under this rule.
(6) The Central Government or the Authority, after hearing the appellant and other parties, and after taking into consideration other relevant facts, if any, shall dispose of the appeal, within a period of sixty days.
(7) In disposing of an appeal, the Central Government or the Authority may modify or cancel the impugned order, direction or policy decision, as the case may be.
23. Manner of inquiry by the Adjudicating Officer.- (1) No Adjudicating Officer shall inquire into a complaint of non-compliance or contravention of the provisions referred to in section 55 of the Act unless the complaint is filed by or on behalf of the authorised officer, along with all necessary documents, either on its own motion or on receipt of a representation.
(2) The complaint may be represented by a presenting officer who shall be a legal practitioner and shall appear and present the case before the Adjudicating Officer, on behalf of the authorised officers, within their respective jurisdiction.
(3) The presenting officer shall, before forwarding the matter under sub-rule(1) to the Adjudicating Officer, process the same exercising reasonable due diligence, and bring on record all relevant facts and circumstances that need to be taken into account for imposing penalty, and also to ascertain if it is a matter necessary for adjudication and the authorised officer shall provide all the relevant documents and facts related to the case, to the presenting officer.
(4) The adjudicating officer within thirty days of receipt of the complaint shall issue a notice to the person against whom non-compliance or contravention to the provisions of section 3 or section 4 or section 6 or section 7 of the Act is alleged under section 55A of the Act, along with the particulars of the matter against him clearly specifying the nature of noncompliance or contravention, and such person may either appear personally or through an authorised representative, on such date as specified, which shall not be less than fifteen days from the date of service thereon and shall not exceed thirty days, in such format as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(5) On such date as specified in the notice, the person or his authorised representative may admit or deny the allegations levelled against him, before the Adjudicating Officer.

(6) If the person or his representative admits to the allegations, the Adjudicating Officer shall state in his order such admission and impose a penalty and send a copy of the order to the concerned presenting officer and the person against whom complaint was filed.
(7) In cases not covered under sub-rule (6), the adjudicating officer shall fix a date for inquiry and communicate the same to the concerned presenting officer, for presentation of the matter.
(8) On the date fixed, the adjudicating officer shall give an opportunity to the person to produce documents or evidence as he may consider relevant to the inquiry.
(9) If any person fails or refuses to appear before the adjudicating officer as required by sub-rule (8) without sufficient cause, the adjudicating officer may proceed with the inquiry in the absence of such person.
(10) The Adjudicating Officer may also refer to the findings of the authority or officer authorised under section 55B of the Act or utilize their services, wherever necessary.
(11) While holding such inquiry, the adjudicating officer shall have power to summon and enforce the attendance of any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the matter to give evidence or to produce any document which, in the opinion of the adjudicating officer, may be useful for or relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry.
(12) For the purposes of sub-rule(11), the Adjudicating Officer shall have the following powers of a Civil Court, as specified in the Civil Procedure Code, 1908, namely:- (a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents or other electronic records; and (c) receiving evidence on affidavits.
(13) On presentation of matter by the concerned presenting officer, defence given by the person and recording of such information as necessary, the adjudicating officer shall either dismiss the allegation or make such order as it deemed fit.
(14) All orders of the Adjudicating Officer shall be speaking orders, irrespective of whether penalty has been imposed by such order or not.
(15) The Adjudicating Officer shall complete the adjudication of every matter within ninety days from the date fixed under sub-rule (7), which is extendable upto a further period of ninety days if sufficient cause exists.
(16) If the subject-matter of a complaint received under this rule is already in question before the National Green Tribunal or any other Court of competent jurisdiction on the date of receipt of the matter, the proceedings under this rule shall not be initiated unless such latter case is finally disposed of and the Adjudicating Officer shall make an order of adjournment of the proceedings under this sub-rule.
(17) If the adjudicating officer is satisfied that the person concerned has failed to comply with the provisions of section 3 or section 4 or section 6 or section 7 of the Act, he shall impose a penalty as deemed fit in accordance with the provisions of section 55 of the Act.
(18) The Adjudicating Officer shall not pass an order for penalty if the Tribunal or Court has already passed an order to that effect in a proceedings referred to in under sub-rule (16).
(19) Any person or a benefit claimer who intends to make a complaint before any court about any offence under this Act shall give a notice of not less than thirty days in Form 16 about his intention to make a complaint to the Central Government or authority or officer authorised in that behalf, under section 61 of the Act, through online or registered post with acknowledgement due or speed post.
(20) Upon expiry of a period of thirty days from the recipient of notice and not being satisfied with the action taken by authority or Central Government, such person or the benefit claimer may file a written complaint before a court having jurisdiction to take cognizance of the offence under the Act.

Provided that the Central Government or any authority or officer authorised by that Government may under clause (a) of section 61 of the Act make a written complaint to court for taking cognizance of any offence under the Act.
24. Appeals from Order of Adjudicating Officer.- Any person aggrieved by the order of the Adjudicating Officer may prefer an appeal to the National Green Tribunal established under section 3 of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 (19 of 2010), under section 52A of the Act.
25. Factors to be considered while determining quantum of penalty.- (1) The Adjudicating Officer shall have due regard to the following factors for determining the quantum of penalty, namely: - (a) the amount of disproportionate gain or unfair advantage, wherever quantifiable, made as a result of contravention of the provisions of the Act;

(b) the penalty for contravention of the provisions referred to in section 55 of the Act shall not be less than one lakh rupees and may extend to fifty lakh rupees;
(c) in case the damage caused, exceeds the amount of penalty under sub-rule (2) then the penalty shall be commensurate with the damage caused.

Explanation.- In this clause the expression damage, includes damage to the environment and value of the biological resource used and value of the products derived from it by violating the provisions of the Act;
(d) in case of a failure or continued contravention, an additional penalty not exceeding one crore rupees may be imposed over and above the penalty under sub-rule (2) or (3);
(e) any other things as may be considered by the Adjudicating Officer to be relevant for the conservation of biological diversity and protection of the environment.
(2) A penalty shall not be imposed without giving the person or entity concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
(3) The penalty as imposed by the Adjudicating Officer under the Act shall be in addition to the liability to pay relief or compensation under section 55 of the Act and section 17 of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010(19 of 2010).
26. Deposition of the penalty amount.– All amounts of penalties realised under these rules shall be deposited in the National Biodiversity Fund and all the amounts of penalties relating to offences under section 7 of the Act shall be deposited in the Biodiversity Fund of the State Biodiversity Board or the Union territory Biodiversity Council concerned, as the case may be.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE Application Forms and Fees Sl. no.
Purpose of the application Application Fee (1) (2) (3)
1.
Application for seeking prior approval of the National Biodiversity Authority for access to biological resources or knowledge associated thereto for research or for bio-survey and bio-utilization by persons covered under section 3(2) of the Act.

For Individual ₹ 10,000.00 For entity ₹ 20,000.00
2.
Application for seeking prior approval of the National Biodiversity Authority for access to biological resources or knowledge associated thereto for commercial utilization by persons covered under section 3(2) of the Act

For Individual ₹ 10,000.00 For entity ₹ 20,000.00
3.
Application for seeking prior approval of the National Biodiversity Authority for sharing or transferring the results of research to section 3(2) persons for commercial purposes or otherwise.

For Individual ₹ 5,000.00 For entity ₹ 10,000.00
4.
Application for prior registration with the National Biodiversity Authority to use the results of research for further research by the transferee (section 3(2) person)

For Individual ₹ 2,000.00 For entity ₹ 5,000.00
5.
Application for seeking prior approval of the National Biodiversity Authority to use the results of research for commercial utilisation by the transferee (section 3(2) person)

For Individual ₹ 10,000.00 For entity ₹ 20,000.00
6.
Application for seeking prior approval to use the results of research for obtaining intellectual property rights by the transferee (section 3(2) person)

For Individual ₹ 5,000.00 For entity ₹ 10,000.00
7.
Application for seeking prior approval of the National Biodiversity Authority before grant of intellectual property rights by persons covered under section 3 (2) of the Act

For Individual ₹ 5,000.00 For entity ₹ 10,000.00
8.
Application for registration with the National Biodiversity Authority before grant of intellectual property rights by persons covered under section 7 of the Act.

For Individual ₹ 2,000.00 For entity ₹5,000.00
9.
Application for seeking prior approval of the National Biodiversity Authority for commercialisation of intellectual property rights by persons covered under section 7 of the Act.

For Individual ₹ 5,000.00 For entity ₹ 10,000.00
10.
Form for declaration of the use of biological resource or associated traditional knowledge obtained from any foreign country, in India.
Nil
11.
Application cum format for obtaining certificate of origin for cultivated medicinal plants

₹ 200.00
12.
Format of book containing details of cultivated medicinal plants to be maintained by the Biodiversity Management Committee

Nil
13.
Application for seeking prior approval of the National Biodiversity Authority for sending /carrying the biological resources outside India by Indian researchers / institutions for conducting non-commercial research or research for emergency purposes.
₹ 1,000.00
14.
Form of Memorandum of Appeal before the Central Government for settlement of disputes Nil
15.
Format of notice to be issued by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change or National Biodiversity Authority for appearance before it

Nil
16.
Format of notice by any person/benefit claimer Nil THE SECOND SECHEDULE [see rule 2(1)(g)] FORM -1 {See section 3 of the Act and rule 13(1)} Application for seeking prior approval of the National Biodiversity Authority for access to biological resources or knowledge associated thereto for research or for bio-survey and bio-utilization by persons covered under section 3(2) of the Act.
(1) Particulars of the applicant (i) Category of the applicant

(Drop down menu) a.
Individual b. Individual and Entity c.
Entity (ii) Name of the applicant

(iii) Status of the applicant (Drop down menu) a.
NRI b. Non-Indian c.
Entity covered under section 3(2) of the Act.
(iv) Address of the applicant

(Postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number) (v) Profile of the individual/entity

(vi) Nature of the business (applicable if the applicant is an entity)

(vii) Details of the authorized representative for the applicant (applicable if the applicant is an entity)

(Name with postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number)

(viii) Contact person of the applicant in India (If any) (Name with postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number)

(2) Details of the biological resources and knowledge associated thereto intended to be accessed (i) Details of the biological resource (Drop down menu) i.
Nature of the biological resource(s) (plants/animals/microbes/genetic material/variety/hybrid) ii.
Common name iii.
Scientific name (Genus and species/ variety/strain) iv.
Plant parts (Seed, stem, bark, leaf, flower, fruit, root, rhizome, genetic material, extract, exudate, etc.) v.
Quantity of each biological resource (in Kg/gm/ml) vi.
Duration of access (expected start and end date) vii.
Frequency of access (number of times the biological resource(s) will be accessed) viii.
Source of access (wild/cultivated/ institution/repository/traders/ market) ix.
Geographical location (village, taluk, district, state). If procured from a trader/institute, their name, address and contact details to be provided; if procured from repository/institution, then origin of collection to be provided.
(ii) Details about the knowledge associated thereto:
(a) Nature of the knowledge associated (Oral/ documented)

(b) Details of traditional knowledge intended to be accessed (in not more than 100 words)

(c) Name of the traditional knowledge holder (individual/community)

(d) Address of the traditional knowledge holder (individual community)

(3) Expected duration of research

(4) The purpose for which access is required including the type and extent of research being derived and expected to be derived from it (i) Brief description about the research

(ii) Expected outcome of the research

(5) Details of any institution which will participate in the research and development activities (i) Name of the person or institute

(ii) Contact details (Postal address(es) including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number)

(6) Preferred mode of benefit sharing i.
Monetary ii.
Non-monetary iii.
Both (7) Estimation of benefits that would flow to India/communities arising out of the use of accessed biological resources and knowledge associated thereto

(8) Any other information considered relevant

(9) Details of remittance of application fee (mode of payment, transaction ID, amount, date, etc.)

Declaration I/We declare that:
1. Collection of the proposed biological resources shall not adversely affect the sustainability of the resources;
2. Collection of the proposed biological resource shall not entail any environmental impact;
3. Collection of the proposed biological resource shall not pose any risk to the ecosystems; and
4. Collection of the proposed biological resource and knowledge associated thereto shall not adversely affect the local communities.

I/We further declare that the information provided in the application form is true and correct to the best of my/our knowledge and belief and that it conceals nothing and that no part of it is false. I/We shall be responsible for any incorrect or wrong information provided.

{See section 3 of the Act and rule 13(1)} Application for seeking prior approval of the National Biodiversity Authority for access to biological resources or knowledge associated thereto for commercial utilization by persons covered under section 3(2) of the Act (1) Particulars of the applicant (i) Category of the applicant (Drop-down menu) a.
Individual b. Individual and Entity c.
Entity (ii) Name of the applicant

(iii) Status of the applicant (Drop down menu) a.
NRI b. Non-Indian c.
Entity covered under section 3(2) of the Act (iv) Address of the applicant

(Postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number)

(v) Profile of the individual/entity

(vi) Nature of the business (applicable if the applicant is an entity)

(vii) Details of the authorised representative for the applicant (applicable if the applicant is an entity)

(Name with postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number)

(viii) Contact person of the applicant in India (If any)

(Name with postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number)

(2) Details of the biological resources and knowledge associated thereto intended to be accessed (i) Details of biological resource (Drop down menu)

i.
Nature of the biological resource (plants/animals/microbes/genetic material/variety/hybrid) ii.
Common name iii.
Scientific name (Genus and species/ variety/strain) iv.
Plant parts (Seed, stem, bark, leaf, flower, fruit, root, rhizome, genetic material, extract, exudate, etc.) v.
Quantity of each biological resource (in Kg/gm/ml) vi.
Duration of access (expected start and end date) vii.
Source of access (wild/cultivated/ institution/repository/trader/ market)

viii.
Geographical location (village, taluk, district, state). If procured from a trader institute, their name, address and contact details to be provided; if procured from repository/institution, then origin of collection to be provided.
(ii) Details about the knowledge associated thereto:
(a) Nature of the knowledge associated (Oral/ documented) (b) Details of traditional knowledge intended to be accessed (in not more than 100 words)

(c) Name of the traditional knowledge holder (individual community)

(d) Address of the traditional knowledge holder (individual community)

(3) The purpose for which access is required including the type and extent of commercial utilisation being derived and expected to be derived from it (i) Brief description about the commercial utilization

(ii) Expected duration of commercial utilization

(4) Details of the approval obtained from the Authority for the purpose of research or for bio-survey and bio-utilization (i) NBA application number

(ii) Date of approval

(iii) Upload copy of the approval granted (in the form of agreement) by the National Biodiversity Authority

(5) Preferred mode of benefit sharing i.
Monetary ii.
Non-monetary iii.
Both (6) Estimation of benefits that would flow to India/ communities arising out of the use of accessed biological resources and knowledge associated thereto

(7) Any other information considered relevant

(8) Details of remittance of application fee (Mode of payment, transaction ID, amount, date, etc.)

Declaration I/We declare that:
1. Collection of the proposed biological resource shall not adversely affect the sustainability of the resources;
2. Collection of the proposed biological resource shall not entail any environmental impact;
3. Collection of the proposed biological resource shall not pose any risk to the ecosystems; and
4. Collection of the proposed biological resource and knowledge associated thereto shall not adversely affect the local communities.

I/We further declare that the information provided in the application form is true and correct to the best of my/our knowledge and belief and that it conceals nothing and that no part of it is false. I/We shall be responsible for any incorrect or wrong information provided.

{See section 4 of the Act and rule 15(1)(a)} Application for seeking prior approval of the National Biodiversity Authority for sharing or transferring the results of research to section 3(2) persons for commercial purposes or otherwise (1) Particulars of the applicant (i) Category of the applicant (Drop-down menu) a.
Individual b. Individual and Entity c.
Entity (ii) Name of the applicant

(iii) Status of the applicant (Drop down menu) a.
Indian b. NRI c.
Non-Indian d. Entity covered under section 3(2) of the Act e.
Entity covered under section 7 of the Act (iv) Address of the applicant (Postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number)

(v) Profile of the individual/entity

(vi) Nature of the business (applicable if the applicant is an entity)

(vii) Details of the authorised representative for the applicant (applicable if the applicant is an entity) (Name with postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number)

(viii) Contact person of the applicant in India (If any) (Name with postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number)

(2) Details of the results of research (i) Details of the results of research conducted

(ii) Details and nature of results of research to be transferred or shared

(3) Details of the biological resources used in the research (Drop down menu)

i.
Nature of the biological resource(s) (plants/animals/microbes/genetic material/variety/hybrid) ii.
Common name

iii.
Scientific name (Genus and species/ variety/strain) iv.
Plant parts (Seed, stem, bark, leaf, flower, fruit, root, rhizome, genetic material, extract, exudate, etc.) v.
Source of access (wild/cultivated/institution/repository/traders/ market) vi.
Geographical location (village, taluk, district, state). If procured from a trader institute, their name, address and contact details to be provided; if procured from repository/ institution, then origin of collection to be provided.

(4) Details of the traditional knowledge associated thereto if any used in the research (i) Details of traditional knowledge accessed (in not more than 100 words)

(ii) Name of the traditional knowledge holder (individual community)

(iii) Address of the traditional knowledge holder (individual/ community)

(iv) Consent obtained from the community/individual, if any

(5) Details of the approval obtained from the Authority for undertaking research by section 3(2) persons (i) NBA application number

(ii) Date of approval

(iii) Upload copy of the approval granted (in the form of agreement) by the National Biodiversity Authority

(6) Details of the institution where research and development activities were carried out (i) Provide the name and contact details of the institution/entity where research and development activities were carried out

(ii) Name of the institution

(iii) Contact details (Postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number)

(iv) Attach a copy of the letter issued to the applicant by the competent authority of the institution/ entity where research and development activities were carried out.

(7) Details of the individual/entity to whom the research results are intended to be transferred or shared.
(i) Name(s) and contact details of individual entity

{See section 4 of the Act and rule 15(1)(b)}

Application for registration with the National Biodiversity Authority to use the results of research for further research by the transferee (1) Particulars of the applicant (transferee) (i) Category of the applicant

(Drop down menu) a.
Individual b. Individual and Entity c.
Entity (ii) Name of the applicant

(iii) Status of the applicant (Drop down menu) a.
NRI b. Non-Indian c.
Entity covered under section 3(2) of the Act (ii) Details of the intended use of research results by the transferee

(8) Details of economic, scientific or any other benefits that are intended, or may accrue to the applicant seeking approval for share or transfer of results of research.

(9) Details of any memorandum of understanding or agreement executed between the proposed recipient and the applicant seeking approval for share or transfer of results of research (Copy of Memorandum of Understanding /agreement, if any, to be uploaded.)

(10) Any other information considered relevant

(11) Details of remittance of application fee (Mode of payment, transaction ID, amount, date, etc.)

Declaration I/We declare that:

a.
I/We inform the transferee to register with the Authority if he/she intends to use the results of research for further research as per the extant provisions of the Act.
b. I/We inform the transferee to seek prior approval of the Authority if he/she intends to use the results of research for commercial utilization or for obtaining intellectual property rights as per the extant provisions of the Act.
c.
The information provided in the application is true and correct to the best of my/our knowledge and belief that it conceals nothing and that no part of it is false. I/We shall be responsible for any incorrect or wrong information provided.

(iv) Address of the applicant

(Postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number)

(v) Profile of the individual/entity

(vi) Nature of the business (applicable if the applicant is an entity) (vii) Turnover of the organization in Indian rupees (applicable if the applicant is an entity)

(viii) Details of the authorised representative for the applicant (applicable if the applicant is an entity)

(Name with postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number)

(ix) Contact person of the applicant in India (If any)

(Name with postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number)

(2) Details of the approval obtained from the Authority by the transferor or person from whom results of research are obtained under sections 4 and 20 of the Act (i) Name of the person/entity/institution

(ii) Postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number

(iii) NBA Application number

(iv) Date of approval

(v) Upload copy of the approval granted (in the form of agreement) by the National Biodiversity Authority

(3) Brief description about the research activities to be carried out by the applicant

(4) Details of any person institute that are to be involved in the research (i) Name of the person or institute

(ii) Contact details (Postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and landline number)

(5) Expected duration of research

(6) Expected outcome of research

(7) Benefits that would flow to India/ communities arising out of the proposed research on the use of obtained results of research

(8) Any other information considered relevant

(9) Details of remittance of application fee (Mode of payment, transaction ID, amount, date, etc.)

Declaration

a.
I/We further declare that the information provided in the application form is true and correct to the best of my/our knowledge and belief and that it conceals nothing and that no part of it is false.
b. I/We shall be responsible for any incorrect or wrong information provided.
c.
I/We shall declare the progress made in the research activities to the Authority at the end of every calendar year.
d. I/We shall obtain prior approval of the Authority at the time of commercial utilization of the obtained results of research or for obtaining intellectual property rights within or outside India as per section 4 and 6 of the Act respectively.

Place Signature.

{See section 4 of the Act and rule 15(1)(c)} Application for seeking prior approval of the National Biodiversity Authority to use the results of research for commercial utilisation by the transferee.

(1) Particulars of applicant (Transferee) (i) Category of the applicant

(Drop down menu) a.
Individual b. Individual and Entity c.
Entity (ii) Name of the applicant

(iii) Status of the applicant (Drop down menu) a.
NRI b. Non-Indian c.
Entity covered under section 3(2) of the Act (iv) Address of the applicant

(Postal address including PIN code, email, mobile, alternate mobile number and/or landline number)

(v) Profile of the individual/entity

(vi) Nature of the business (applicable if the applicant is an entity)

(vii) Turnover of the organization in Indian rupees (applicable if the applicant is an entity)

(viii) Authorized representative (applicable if the applicant is an entity)

(Postal address including PIN code, email, mobile, alternate mobile number and/or landline number)

(ix) Contact person in India (If any)

(Postal address including PIN code, email, mobile, alternate mobile number and/or landline number)

(2) Details of the approval obtained from the Authority by the transferor or person from whom results of research are obtained under section 4 and 20 of the Act (i) Name of the person/entity/institution

(ii) Postal address including PIN code

(iii) E-mail ID, mobile, alternate mobile number and/or landline number

(iv) NBA Application number

(v) Date of approval

(vi) Upload copy of the approval granted (in the form of agreement) by the National Biodiversity Authority

(3) Brief description about the commercial activity to be carried out by the applicant

(4) Expected duration of the commercial utilization

(5) Expected outcome and benefits that would flow to India/ communities arising out of the commercial utilisation of the obtained results of research

(6) Any other information considered relevant

(7) Details of remittance of application fee (Mode of payment, transaction ID, amount, date, etc.)

Declaration

a.
I/We further declare that the information provided in the application form is true and correct to the best of my/our knowledge and belief and that it conceals nothing and that no part of it is false.

b. I/We shall be responsible for any incorrect or wrong information provided.

Place Signature.

{See section 4 of the Act and rule 15(1)(d)} Application for seeking prior approval of the National Biodiversity Authority to use the results of research for obtaining intellectual property rights by the transferee.

(1) Particulars of applicant (Transferee) (i) Category of the applicant

(Drop down menu) a.
Individual b. Individual and Entity c.
Entity (ii) Name of the applicant

(iii) Status of the applicant (Drop down menu) a.
NRI b. Non-Indian c.
Entity covered under section 3(2) of the Act (iv) Address of the applicant (Postal address including PIN code, email, mobile, alternate mobile number and/or landline number)

(v) Profile of the individual/entity

(vi) Nature of business (applicable if the applicant is an entity)

(vii) Turnover of the organization in Indian rupees (applicable if the applicant is an entity)

(viii) Authorized representative (applicable if the applicant is an entity)

(Postal address including PIN code, email, mobile, alternate mobile number and/or landline number)

(ix) Details of the patent attorney/contact person (Postal address including PIN code, e-mail, mobile, alternate mobile and/or landline number)

(2) Details of the transferor from whom the results of the research are obtained (i) Name of the person/entity/institution

(ii) Postal address including PIN code

(iii) E-mail ID, mobile, alternate mobile number and/or landline number

(3) Details of the approval obtained from the National Biodiversity Authority by the transferor or person from whom results of research are obtained under section 4 of the Act (i) NBA Application number

(ii) Date of approval

(iii) Upload copy of the approval granted (in the form of agreement) by the National Biodiversity Authority

(4) Details of the invention (i) Title of invention

(ii) Abstract/details of the invention

(iii) Details of the patent office where the applicant intends to file patent application for the said invention

(iv) Whether any intellectual property rights application has been filed in or outside India for the present invention as on date

(5) Details of remittance of application fee

(Mode of payment, transaction ID, amount, date, etc.) (6) Any other information considered relevant

Declaration a.
I/We further declare that the information provided in the application form is true and correct to the best of my/our knowledge and belief and that it conceals nothing and that no part of it is false.
b. I/We shall be responsible for any incorrect or wrong information provided.

Place Signature.

{See section 6(1) of the Act and rule 16(1)(a)} Application for seeking prior approval of the National Biodiversity Authority before grant of intellectual property rights by persons covered under section 3 (2) of the Act.
(1) Particulars of the applicant (i) Category of the applicant (Drop-down menu) a.
Individual b. Individual and Entity c.
Entity (ii) Name of the applicant

(as in the patent application)

(iii) Status of the applicant (Drop down menu) a.
NRI b. Non-Indian c.
Entity covered under section 3(2) of the Act (iv) Address of the applicant

(Postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number)

(v) Profile of the individual/entity

(vi) Nature of the business (applicable if the applicant is an entity)

(vii) Details of the authorised representative for the applicant (applicable if the applicant is an entity) (Name with postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number)

(viii) Details of the patent attorney/contact person (if applicable) (Name with postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number)

(2) Details of the approval obtained from the National Biodiversity Authority for research under section 3 of the Act (i) NBA application number

(ii) Date of approval

(iii) Upload copy of the approval granted (in the form of agreement) by the National Biodiversity Authority

(3) Details of any other organization involved in the research and development activities

(4) Details of the invention (i) Title of the Invention

(ii) Field of Invention

Drop down (Agro-chemical, biotechnology, chemical, food, pharmaceutical, textile, bio-chemistry, polymer technology, microbiology, bio-medical engineering, agriculture engineering, traditional knowledge biotechnology, traditional knowledge chemical or any other relevant field) (iii) Abstract/details of the invention (in not more than one hundred and fifty words)

(iii) Details of the patent office where the applicant intends to file patent application for the said invention [Names of the countries to be placed in the drop down menu] (iv) Whether any patent application has been filed in or outside India for the present invention as on date Yes/ No

(vi) If answer to (v) is ‘Yes’, details to be provided:

Sl No Name of the country [Drop down menu] Patent office in which application has been filed [Drop down menu] Date of filing of the patent application Patent application number Status of the application as on date (Filed/published/ under examination /under hearing/ granted) [Drop down menu] If granted, patent number and date of grant

(5) Details of the biological resource accessed/ claimed in the invention

a.
Nature of the accessed biological resource(s) (Plant/animal/ microorganism/ fungi/algae and others) [Drop down] b. Common name c.
Scientific name (Genus and species/ variety/strain)

d.
Plant parts (whole plant, seed, stem, bark, leaf, flower, fruit, root, rhizome, etc.) [drop down] e.
Source of access (Market/trader/ wild/self-cultivated/repository/others to be specified) [drop down] f.
Geographical location (village, taluk, district, state). If procured from trader/institute, entity’s names, addresses and contact details to be provided. If procured from repository/ institution, then origin of collection is to be provided.
(6) Details of any traditional knowledge associated thereto accessed (i) Details of traditional knowledge associated thereto accessed (in not more than one hundred words)

(ii) Name of the holder(s) of the traditional knowledge associated thereto (individual / community)

(iii) Address of the traditional knowledge holder individual/community)

(iv) Traditional knowledge associated thereto obtained from any other source

(6) Any other information considered relevant

(7) Details of remittance of application fee (Mode of payment, transaction ID, amount, date, etc.)

Declaration I/We declare that:

a.
The information provided in the application form is true and correct to the best of my/our knowledge and belief and that it conceals nothing and that no part of it is false.
b. I/We shall be responsible for any incorrect or wrong information provided.
c.
Prior approval of the National Biodiversity Authority is mandatory under rule 16 for access to biological resources and knowledge associated thereto while commercializing the patent granted.

{See section 6(1A) of the Act and rule 16 (2)(a)}

Application for registration with the National Biodiversity Authority before grant of intellectual property rights by persons covered under section 7 of the Act

(1) Particulars of the applicant (i) Category of the applicant

(Drop down menu) Individual Individual and Entity Entity (ii) Name of the applicant (as in patent application)

(iii) Status of the applicant (Drop down menu) Indian Entity covered under section 7 of the Act (iv) Address of the applicant

(Postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number)

(v) Profile of the individual/entity

(vi) Nature of the business (applicable if the applicant is an entity)

(vii) Details of the authorised representative for the applicant (applicable if the applicant is an entity)

(Name with postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number)

(viii) Details of the patent attorney/contact person (if applicable)

(Name with postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and landline number)

(2) Details of the invention (i) Title of the invention

(ii) Field of invention

Drop down (Agro-chemical, biotechnology, chemical, food, pharmaceutical, textile, biochemistry, polymer technology, microbiology, biomedical engineering, agriculture engineering, traditional knowledge biotechnology, traditional knowledge chemical or any other relevant field) (iii) Abstract/details of the invention (not more than one hundred and fifty words)

(iv) Details of the patent office where the applicant intends to file patent application for the said invention [Names of the countries to be placed in the drop down menu] (v) Whether any patent application has been filed in or outside India for the present invention as on date

(vi) If answer to (v) is ‘Yes’, details to be provided:

Sl.
No.
Name of the country [Drop down menu] Patent office in which application has been filed [Drop down menu] Date of filing of the patent application Patent application number

(3) Details of the biological resource accessed/claimed in the invention

Nature of the accessed biological resource(s) (Plant/animal/ microorganism/fungi/algae/others) [Drop down] Common name Scientific name (Genus and species/variety/strain) Plant parts (whole plant, seed, stem, bark, leaf, flower, fruit, root, rhizome, etc.) Source of access (Market/trader/ wild/ selfcultivated/repository/ others) Geographical location (village, taluk, district, state).
If procured from trader/institute, entity’s name, address, and contact details to be provided. If procured from repository/institution, then origin of collection is to be provided.
(4) Details of traditional knowledge accessed, if any (i) Details of traditional knowledge accessed (in not more than 100 words)

(ii) Name of the traditional knowledge holder, (individual community)

(iii) Address of the traditional knowledge holder (individual/community)

(iv) Traditional knowledge associated thereto obtained from any other source

(5) Details of any organization involved in the research and development activities

(6) Any other information considered relevant

(7) Details of remittance of application fee

(mode of payment, transaction ID, amount, date, etc.)

Declaration I/We declare that:

The information provided in the application form is true and correct to the best of my/our knowledge and belief and that it conceals nothing and that no part of it is false.
I/We shall be responsible for any incorrect or wrong information provided.
I/We shall obtain prior approval of the Authority at the time of commercialization of the patent as per section 6(1B) of the Act and rule 16(3)(a) of the Rules.

{See section 6(1B) of the Act and rule 16(3)(a)}

Application for seeking prior approval of the National Biodiversity Authority (post registration) for commercialisation of intellectual property rights by persons covered under section 7 of the Act

(1) Particulars of the applicant (i) Category of the applicant

(Drop down menu) a.
Individual b. Individual and Entity c.
Entity (ii) Name of the applicant (as in patent application)

(iii) Status of the applicant (Drop down menu) a.
Indian b. Entity covered under section 7 of the Act (iv) Address of the applicant

(Postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number)

(v) Profile of the individual/entity

(vi) Nature of business (applicable if the applicant is an entity)

(vii) Details of the authorised representative for the applicant (applicable if the applicant is an entity)

(Name with postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number)

(viii) Details of the patent attorney/contact person (if applicable)

(Name with postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number)

(2) Details of the registration made with the National Biodiversity Authority before grant of intellectual property rights (i) NBA registration number

(ii) Title of the invention

(iii) Details of the patent office/countries in which patents have been granted as on date

(Copy of patent certificate issued by the patent office to be uploaded) [List of countries to be in Drop down]

(iv) Upload copy of the latest Form-27 submitted with the Indian patent office, if any

(v) Whether details of biological resources furnished in the registration and list of biological resources furnished in this application is one and the same or different?
Yes / No.

If no, furnish the details of biological resources given below:
a.
Nature of the accessed biological resource(s) (Plant/animal/ microorganism/fungi/algae/others) [Drop down] b. Common name c.
Scientific name (Genus and species/variety/strain)

d. Plant parts (whole plant, seed, stem, bark, leaf, flower, fruit, root, rhizome, etc.) e.
Source of access (Market/trader/ wild/ selfcultivated/repository/ others) f.
Geographical location (village, taluk, district, state). If procured from trader/institute, entity’s name, address, and contact details to be provided. If procured from repository/institution, then origin of collection is to be provided.
(3) Details of commercialisation (i) Details of each country where the invention is sought to be commercialized

i.
Name of the country (Drop-down) ii.
Patent number iii.
Mode of commercialization (Licensing/assignment/selfmanufacture/transfer of particular patent rights alone/any other mode) iv.
Details of each licensee/assignee/ transferee/ any other person (Names with Postal addresses including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number) v.
Period of commercialization (in years) vi.
Amount of revenue generated, if any / likely to be generated (4) Any other information considered relevant

(5) Details of remittance of application fee (Mode of payment, transaction ID, amount, date, etc.)

Declaration I/We declare that:
The information provided in the application form is true and correct to the best of my/our knowledge and belief and that it conceals nothing and that no part of it is false.
a.
I/We shall be responsible for any incorrect or wrong information provided.
b. Prior intimation to the concerned State Biodiversity Board or Union territory Biodiversity Council shall be provided for accessing the biological resource and/or traditional knowledge associated thereto for commercial utilization as per section 7 of the Act.

Place: Signature:
Date: Name:

{See section 36A of the Act and rule 18(1)} Form for declaration of the use of biological resource(s) and/or associated traditional knowledge obtained from any foreign country, in India

Sl .no Particulars

(1) Name of the person or entity

(2) Category of the applicant

Individual Individual and Entity Entity (3) Status of the applicant (Drop down menu) Indian NRI

Non-Indian Entity covered under section 3(2) of the Act Entity covered under section 7 of the Act (4) Complete address Postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number)

(5) Details of biological resource used

(i) Scientific and common name of the biological resource (ii) Country from where biological resource was/were accessed

(iii) Whether the country from which the biological resource were accessed is a Party to Nagoya Protocol Yes/No (Please tick whichever is applicable) (6) Whether approval of the Competent National Authority of the country of origin of biological resource has been obtained Yes/No [drop down- list of country]

(i) Details of the ABS-CH Unique Identifier of internationally recognized certificate of compliance (if available).

(ii) If the internationally recognized certificate of compliance is not available, the following information may be provided

(a) Source of the biological resource

(b) Purpose of the utilization of the biological resource Research Commercial utilization Obtaining intellectual property rights Others (iii) Details of patent applications filed, if any

Declaration

I/we hereby declare that I/we have complied with the provisions of prior informed consent and mutually agreed terms of the country from where the biological resources have been obtained.
I/ we hereby declare and solemnly affirm that the information provided above is true and correct to the best of my knowledge.

Place:
Date: Signature of the Applicant FORM–11 {See section 7 of the Act and rule 19(1)} Application cum format for obtaining certificate origin for cultivated medicinal plants

(to be issued by the Biodiversity Management Committee)

Unique Identity Number ( Alpha numeric to be assigned by the BMC) CODE: State/District/ Mandal/ Taluk/ Town/ Village/ BMC/ Year/ Company Name / numerical Number Sl.no Particulars :
To be filled by the applicant (1) Name of the Biodiversity Management Committee :
...
(Village or Town / District / State / Union Territory) (2) Name of the applicant :

(3) Complete Address (Postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number) :

(4) Name of the species and varieties to be accessed :
Common name Scientific name (Genus and species/variety/strain, (if known)

Parts (5) Name of the cultivator / farmer :

(6) Postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number :

(7) Geo-coordinates of the cultivated area :
(If known) (8) Survey number of the land :

(9) Extent of area under cultivation of the medicinal plants (in acres) :

(10) Approximate quantity of cultivated medicinal plants for which certificates is required :
(in kg /quintal / tonne/bale)
-dry weight or
-wet weight (11) Purpose of access :

(12) Period of access :
{from ...( Month) to...(Month)} (13) Price of the medicinal plants (per- kg /quintal / tonne/bale) :

I/we hereby declare and solemnly affirm that the information provided above is true and correct to the best of my knowledge.

CERTIFICATE

This is to certify that the request made by a company/trader/individual/entity has been carefully examined and the medicinal plants have been physically verified in the field. The information given in the application form has been verified from the concerned books [page no... sl.no... date...] maintained by the Biodiversity Management Committee.

It is certified that the above mentioned medicinal plants are from the cultivated source and meet the criteria prescribed under section 7 of the Biological Diversity (Amendment) Act, 2023 read with rule 19 of the Rules.

This certificate is valid up to two years from the date of issue.

Date:

(Name) Place:
Signature of the authorized person of the BMC

Seal

FORM 12 {See section 7of the Act and rule 19(4)}

Format of book containing details of cultivated medicinal plants to be maintained by the Biodiversity Management Committee

...Biodiversity Management Committee,... Panchayat/ Urban Local Body (Specify whether area is covered under The Panchayats Extension to Scheduled Areas (PESA) Act, 1996, wherever applicable)

Sl.
No.
Full details of farmers/ individuals/ entities including postal address mobile, e-mail, etc.
Geographical location of the area where cultivation is being done including name of area extent, geo co-ordinates, period of cultivation, etc.
Details of cultivated medicinal plants including common and botanical names, period of cultivation, average yield per hectare.
Approx., volume/ Quantity available before issue of certificate

[1.wet weight or
2. dry weight]

Quantity/volume for which present certificate is being issued.

[1.wet weight or
2. dry weight] Quantity/volume remaining after issue of the present certificate

(including the extent of area remains to be harvested) Details of the receiver including complete contact details, purpose of collection Unique identity number of certificate issued with date Signed by the Secretary or Chief Executive Officer of the Biodiversity Management Committee and countersigned by the chairperson/ president of urban local body or member of the Biodiversity Management Committee

{See rule 20(1)} Application for seeking prior approval of the National Biodiversity Authority for sending or carrying the biological resources outside India by Indian researchers or institutions for conducting non-commercial research or research for emergency purposes

(1) Particulars of applicant (i) Category of the applicant (Drop down menu) Individual researcher Institution (ii) Name of the applicant and designation

(iii) Address of the applicant

(Postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or landline number)

(iv) Name of the institution

(2) Details of the institution in India (i) Name of the institution

(ii) Address of the institution

(Postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and landline number)

(3) Name of the supervisor or head of institution at the place of work, in India (i) Name of the supervisor or head of institution with complete address

(ii) Designation of the supervisor or head of institution

(4) Details of the supervisor or head of the institution or organisation who guides the proposed research or recipient of the biological resources outside India (i) Category (individual or institution/organization or person receiving the biological resources)

(ii) Name of the supervisor or head of the institution or recipient outside India

(iii) Complete address for communication

(5) Name and details of the funding agency supporting the research, if any

(6) Details of research that are proposed to be carried out (i) Brief description of the research

(ii) Role and involvement of foreign researcher/institution in the research, if any

(iii) Benefits that would accrue to India and to the researcher through this research

(7) Details of biological resources proposed to be carried along or sent for the research (i) a. Common name b. Scientific name c. Nature of biological resource d. Plant parts (seed, stem, bark, leaf, flower, fruit, root, rhizome, genetic material, extract, exudate, etc.) e. Quantity (in number/vial/kg) f. Geographical location (village, taluk, district, state).
If procured from trader/institute, trader name, address and contact details to be provided.
If procured from repository/ institution, then origin of collection is to be provided.
(ii) Expected duration of research to be conducted outside India

(8) If it is for emergency purpose, please specify the details

Declaration

I, son/daughter/wife/husband of aged residing at (full address) in holding a permanent ID Number (Aadhaar card/passport ,etc.)hereby declare that all the information provided above is correct and true.

I hereby affirm that the biological resources shall be used only for the purposes as stated in the application.
I shall not share/provide/part with/ leave behind any biological resource at my collaborator’s facility/ laboratory without the approval of the National Biodiversity Authority.

I, along with my supervisor and collaborator, individually and severally declare that we shall not put to commercial utilisation, nor shall seek any intellectual property rights claim based on the biological resources and traditional knowledge associated thereto used in this research.

In case such a situation arises, we shall apply to the National Biodiversity Authority to seek prior approval. Results, process, products, or other outcomes arising out of this activity shall be shared with the National Biodiversity Authority during and upon completion of research intended along with copies of the relevant documents and publications.
Signature: ...
Date:...
Place: ...

Declaration by the Supervisor/Head of Institution

I, working as in(Name of institution) confirm that the details provided by Mr/ Dr/ Mrs/ Ms. Are true and correct.

Date:...
Place:...
Signature:...
Designation:...
Official Seal:...

Declaration by the Recipient/Collaborator I, working as in (Name of institution/ Organisation) hereby affirm that I or my institution/ organisation shall use the biological resources that were sent by ... (Name of the institution) or being brought by Mr./Dr./Mrs./Ms ... for the purposes as stated in the application and the said biological resources shall be destroyed in full after the completion of the studies or upon completion of the studies the biological resources shall be sent back to the institution from where the biological resources were received as the case maybe, or as decided by the National Biodiversity Authority. I,or the institution I am associated with, shall not claim any ownership under instant application nor shall claim any intellectual property rights over the biological resources, derivatives or other such components without prior approval of the applicant, institution affiliated and the National Biodiversity Authority.

Signature:...
Designation...
Official Seal

{See section 50 of the Act and rule-22(1))} Form of Memorandum of Appeal BEFORE THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, FOREST AND CLIMATE CHANGE, NEW DELHI

OR NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY AUTHORITY (as the case may be) (Memorandum of appeal under section 50 of the Biological Diversity Act, 2002)

Appeal No. of 20

Appellant

Vs.

Respondent(s) (here mention the name and details of the Authority/Board/Council, as the case may be ) The appellant wishes to prefer this memorandum of appeal against the order dated passed by the respondent on the following facts and grounds:

1. FACTS:
(Here briefly mention the facts of the case):

2. GROUND:
(Here mention the grounds on which the appeal is being made) :
i) ii) iii)

3. RELIEF SOUGHT:
i) ii) iii)

4. PRAYER:

a) In the light of information given above, the appellant respectfully prays that the order/ decision of the respondent be quashed/set-aside.
b) The policy/guidelines/regulations framed by the respondent be quashed/modified/ annulled to the extent

Signature of the appellant with seal Address:
Place:
Dated:

VERIFICATION I , the appellant do hereby declare that the information above is true to the best of my knowledge and belief.
Verified on day of.

Signature of the appellant With Seal Address Signature of the Authorised representative of the appellant

Enclosures: 1. Upload an authenticated copy of the order/direction/policy decision against which the appeal has been preferred.

FORM –15 {See section 50 of the Act and rule 22(4)}
FORMAT OF NOTICE FOR APPEARING FOR HEARING

BEFORE THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, FOREST AND CLIMATE CHANGE, NEW DELHI OR National Biodiversity Authority (as the case may be) Appeal No. of 20

Between :

Appellant(s)

Vs.

Respondents(s)

NOTICE Please take notice that the above appeal filed by the appellant, against the order/direction/policy decision (give details) is fixed for hearing on at The copies of the appeal memorandum and other annexures filed along with the appeal are attached herewith for your reference.
Please note that if you fail to appear on said date (or other subsequent date as fixed) of hearing of the appeal, the appeal would be disposed of finally as ex-parte.

Authorised signatory on behalf of the Appellate Authority (Seal)

Date:
Place:
FORM- 16 {See section 61(b) of the Act and rule 24(19)(b)} FORMAT OF NOTICE BY ANY PERSON/BENEFIT CLAIMER By registered post with acknowledgement due From Shri

To,

Sub: NOTICE UNDER SECTION 61(b) OF THE BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY ACT, 2002

Whereas an offence under the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 has been committed/is being committed by...
2. I/We hereby give notice of thirty days under section 61(b) of Biological Diversity Act, 2002 of my/our intention to file a complaint in the court against ... for violation of the provisions of the Act.

3. In support of my/our notice, I am/we are enclosing herewith the following documents as evidence of proof:
1...
2...
3...

Place:
Dated:
Signature

EXPLANATION:
(1) In case the notice has to be given in the name of a company, documentary evidence authorising the person to sign the notice on behalf of the company shall be enclosed with the notice.

(2) Name and address of the alleged offender needs to be given. In case of use of biological resource/traditional knowledge/doing research/bio-survey and bio-utilisation/obtaining intellectual property right/patent without the approval of the Authority, the details thereof and the commercial utilisation, if any, that has occurred, may be furnished.

(3) Documentary evidence shall include photograph(s), technical report(s), etc., for enabling enquiry into the alleged violation/offence.

[F. No. CS-C12018/3/2020-CS-III] RAGHU KUMAR KODALI, Scientist ‘G’

Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054.
SARVESH KUMAR SRIVASTAVA Digitally signed by SARVESH KUMAR SRIVASTAVA Date: 2024.10.25 22:37:49 +05'30'


================================================================================
SOURCE: THE BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY ACT, 2002.pdf
================================================================================

THE BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY ACT, 2002

ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.

CHAPTER II
REGULATION OF ACCESS TO BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY
3. Certain persons not to undertake Biodiversity related activities without approval of National Biodiversity Authority.
4. Results of research not to be transferred to certain persons without approval of National Biodiversity Authority.
5. Certain provisions not to apply to certain collaborative research projects.
6. Application for intellectual property rights not to be made without approval of National Biodiversity Authority.
7. Prior intimation to State Biodiversity Board for accessing biological resource for certain purposes.

CHAPTER III
NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY AUTHORITY
8. Establishment of National Biodiversity Authority.
9. Conditions of service of Chairperson, members and Member-Secretary.
10. Chairperson to be Chief Executive of National Biodiversity Authority.
10A. Member Secretary.
11. Removal of members.
12. Meetings of National Biodiversity Authority.
13. Committees of National Biodiversity Authority.
14. Officers and employees of National Biodiversity Authority.
15. Authentication of orders and decisions of National Biodiversity Authority.
16. Delegation of powers.
17. Expenses of National Biodiversity Authority to be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
CHAPTER IV
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY AUTHORITY
18. Functions and powers of National Biodiversity Authority.
CHAPTER V
APPROVAL BY THE NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY AUTHORITY
19. Approval by National Biodiversity Authority for undertaking certain activities.
20. Transfer of results of research.
21. Determination of fair and equitable benefit sharing by National Biodiversity Authority.

CHAPTER VI
STATE BIODIVERSITY BOARD
SECTIONS
22. Establishment of State Biodiversity Board.
23. Functions of State Biodiversity Board.
24. Power of State Biodiversity Board to restrict certain activities violating the objectives of conservation, etc.
25. Provisions of sections 9 to 17 to apply with modifications to State Biodiversity Board.

CHAPTER VII FINANCE, ACCONTS AND AUDIT OF NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY AUTHORITY
26. Grants or loans by the Central Government.
27. Constitution of National Biodiversity Fund.
28. Annual report of National Biodiversity Authority.
29. Budget, accounts and audit.
30. Annual report to be laid before Parliament.

CHAPTER VIII FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT OF STATE BIODIVERSITY BOARD
31. Grants of money by State Government to State Biodiversity Board.
32. Constitution of State Biodiversity Fund.
33. Annual report of State Biodiversity Board.
34. Audit of accounts of State Biodiversity Board.
35. Annual report of State Biodiversity Board to be laid before State Legislature.

CHAPTER IX
DUTIES OF THE CENTRAL AND THE STATE GOVERNMENTS
36. Central Government to develop national strategies and plans for conservation, promotion and sustainable use of biological diversity.
36A. Measures to be taken by National Biodiversity Authority.
36B. State Government to develop strategies and plans for conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity.
37. Biodiversity heritage sites.
38. Power of Central Government to notify threatened species.
39. Power of Central Government to designate repositories.
40. Provisions of this Act not to apply in certain cases.
CHAPTER X
BIODIVERSITY MANAGEMENT COMMITTEES
41. Constitutions of Biodiversity Management Committees.
CHAPTER XI
LOCAL BIODIVERSITY FUND
42. Grants to Local Biodiversity Fund.
43. Constitution of Local Biodiversity Fund.
44. Application of Local Biodiversity Fund.
45. Annual statement of Biodiversity Management Committees.
46. Audit of accounts of Biodiversity Management Committees.

SECTIONS
47. Annual report, etc., of Biodiversity Management Committee to be submitted to District Magistrate.
CHAPTER XII
MISCELLANEOUS
48. National Biodiversity Authority to be bound by the directions given by Central Government.
49. Power of State Government to give directions.
50. Settlement of disputes.
51. Members, officers, etc., of National Biodiversity Authority and State Biodiversity Board deemed to be public servants.
52. Appeal.
52A. Appeal to National Green Tribunal.
53. Execution of determination or order.
54. Protection of action taken in good faith.
55. Penalties.
55A. Adjudication of penalties.
55B. Power to enter, inspect, survey, etc.
56. Penalty for contravention for directions or orders of Central Government, State Government, National Biodiversity Authority and State Biodiversity Boards.
57. Offences by companies.
58. [Omitted.].
59. Act to have effect in addition to other Acts.
59A. Act not to apply to certain persons.
60. Power of Central Government to give directions to State Government.
61. Cognizance of offences.
62. Power of Central Government to make rules.
63. Power of State Government to make rules.
64. Power to make regulations.
65. Power to remove difficulties.

THE BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY ACT, 2002 ACT NO. 18 OF 2003 [5th February, 2003.] An Act to provide for conservation of biological diversity, sustainable use of its components and fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the use of biological resources, knowledge and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS India is rich in biological diversity and associated traditional and contemporary knowledge system relating thereto.
AND WHEREAS India is a 1[Party] to the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity signed at Rio de Janeiro on the 5th day of June, 1992;
AND WHEREAS the said Convention came into force on the 29th December, 1993;
AND WHEREAS the said Convention reaffirms the sovereign rights of the States over their biological resources;
AND WHEREAS the said Convention has the main objective of conservation of biological diversity, sustainable use of its components and fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of utilisation of genetic resources;
2[AND WHEREAS India is a Party to the Nagoya Protocol on access to genetic resources and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from their utilisation to the convention on Biological Diversity which was adopted on the 29th October, 2010 in Nagoya, Japan;
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to provide for conservation, sustainable utilisation, fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of utilisation of biological resources and also to give effect to the said Convention.] BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Biological Diversity Act, 2002.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 4[(a) “access” means collecting, procuring or possessing any biological resource occurring in or obtained from India or traditional knowledge associated thereto, for the purposes of research or bio-survey or commercial utilisation;

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2023, s. 2, for “party” (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
3. 1st October, 2003 (Ss. 1, 2, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 48, 54, 59, 62, 63, 64, 65), vide notification No. S.O.
1146(E), dated 1st October, 2003, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii).
1st July, 2004 (Ss. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 55, 56, 57, 58, 60, 61), vide notification No. S.O. 753(E), dated 1st July, 2004, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii).
4. Subs. by Act 10 of 2023, s. 3, for clause (a) (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).

(aa) “benefit claimers” means the conservers of biological resources, their by-products, creators or holders of traditional knowledge associated thereto (excluding codified traditional knowledge only for Indians) and information relating to the use of such biological resources, innovations and practices associated with such use and application;] (b) “biological diversity” 1[or “biodiversity”] means the variability among living organisms from all sources and the ecological complexes of which they are part and includes diversity within species or between species and of eco-systems;
2[(c) “biological resources” include plants, animals, micro-organisms or parts of their genetic material and derivatives (excluding value added products), with actual or potential use or value for humanity, but does not include human genetic material;] (d) “bio-survey and bio-utilisation” means survey or collection of species, sub-species, genes, components and extracts of biological resource for any purpose and includes characterisation, inventorisation and bioassay;
(e) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the National Biodiversity Authority or, as the case may be, of the State Biodiversity Board;
1[(ea) “codified traditional knowledge” means the knowledge derived from authoritative books specified in the First Schedule to the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940);] (f) “commercial utilisation” means end uses of biological resources for commercial utilisation such as drugs, industrial enzymes, food flavours, fragrance, cosmetics, emulsifiers, oleoresins, colours, extracts and genes used for improving crops and livestock through genetic intervention, but does not include conventional breeding or traditional practices in use in any agriculture, horticulture, poultry, dairy farming, animal husbandry or bee keeping;
1[(fa) “derivative” means a naturally occurring biochemical compound or metabolism of biological resources, even if it does not contain functional units of heredity;] (g) “fair and equitable benefit sharing” means sharing of benefits as determined by the National Biodiversity Authority under section 21;
1[(ga) “folk variety” means a cultivated variety of plant that was developed, grown and exchanged informally among farmers;
(gb) “India” means the territory of India as referred to in Article 1 of the Constitution, its territorial waters, seabed and sub-soil underlying such waters, continental shelf, exclusive economic zone or any other maritime zone as refferred to in the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other Maritime Zones Act, 1976, and the air space above its territory (80 of
1976);
(gc) “landrace” means primitive cultivar that was grown by ancient farmers and their successors;] (h) “local bodies” means Panchayats and Municipalities, by whatever name called, within the meaning of clause (1) of article 243B and clause (1) of article 243Q of the Constitution and in the absence of any Panchayats or Municipalities, institutions of self-government constituted under any other provision of the Constitution or any Central Act or State Act;
(i) “member” means a member of the National Biodiversity Authority or a State Biodiversity Board and includes the Chairperson;
1[(ia) “Member-Secretary” means the full time Secretary of the National Biodiversity Authority, or of the State Biodiversity Board, as the case may be;] (j) “National Biodiversity Authority” means the National Biodiversity Authority established under section 8;
(k) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2023, s. 3, (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clause (c) (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).

(l) “regulations” means regulations made under this Act;
(m) “research” means study or systematic investigation of any biological resource or technological application, that uses biological systems, living organisms or derivatives thereof to make or modify products or processes for any use;
(n) “State Biodiversity Board” means the State Biodiversity Board established under section 22;
(o) “sustainable use” means the use of components of biological diversity in such manner and at such rate that does not lead to the long-term decline of the biological diversity thereby maintaining its potential to meet the needs and aspirations of present and future generations;
(p) “value added products” means products which may contain portions or extracts of plants and animals in unrecognizable and physically inseparable form.
CHAPTER II REGULATION OF ACCESS TO BIOLOGICAL 1[RESOURCES]
3. Certain persons not to undertake Biodiversity related activities without approval of National Biodiversity Authority.—(1) No person referred to in sub-section (2) shall, without previous approval of the National Biodiversity Authority, obtain any biological resource occurring in India or knowledge associated thereto for research or for commercial utilisation or for bio-survey and bio-utilisation.
(2) The persons who shall be required to take the approval of the National Biodiversity Authority under sub-section (1) are the following, namely:— (a) a person who is not a citizen of India;
(b) a citizen of India, who is a non-resident as defined in clause (30) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961);
(c) a body corporate, association or organisation— (i) not incorporated or registered in India; or 2[(ii) incorporated or registered in India under any law for the time being in force, which is controlled by a foreigner within the meaning of clause (27) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013).] 3[4. Results of research not to be transferred to certain persons without approval of National Biodiversity Authority.— No person or entity shall share or transfer any result of the research on any biological resource occurring in, or obtained or accessed from, India or traditional knowledge associated thereto, for monetary consideration or otherwise, to a person or body corporate referred to in sub-section (2) of section 3, without the prior written approval of the National Biodiversity Authority, except the codified traditional knowledge which is only for Indians:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply if publication of research papers or dissemination of knowledge in any seminar or workshop involving financial benefit is as per the guidelines issued by the Central Government:
Provided further that where the results of research are used for further research, then, the registration with the National Biodiversity Authority shall be necessary:
Provided also that if the results of research are used for commercial utilisation or for obtaining any intellectual property rights, within or outside India, prior approval of the National Biodiversity Authority shall be required to be taken in accordance with the provisions of this Act.]
5. 4[Certain provisions] not to apply to certain collaborative research projects.—5[(1) The provisions of section 3 shall not apply to collaborative research projects involving transfer or exchange of

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2023, s. 4, for “DIVERSITY” (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for sub-clause (ii) (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
4. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “Sections 3 and 4” (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).

biological resource or traditional knowledge associated thereto between institutions, including Government sponsored institutions of India, and such institutions in other countries, if such collaborative research projects satisfy the conditions specified in sub-section (3).] (2) All collaborative research projects, other than those referred to in sub-section (1) which are based on agreements concluded before the commencement of this Act and in force shall, to the extent the provisions of agreement are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or any guidelines issued under clause (a) of sub-section (3), be void.
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), collaborative research projects shall— (a) conform to the policy guidelines issued by the Central Government in this behalf;
(b) be approved by the Central Government.
6. Application for intellectual property rights not to be made without approval of National Biodiversity Authority.—1[(1) Any person or entity covered under sub-section (2) of section 3 applying for an intellectual property right, by whatever name called, in or outside India, for any invention based on any research or information on a biological resource which is accessed from India, including those deposited in repositories outside India, or traditional knowledge associated thereto, shall obtain prior approval of the National Biodiversity Authority before grant of such intellectual property rights.
(1A) Any person covered under section 7 applying for any intellectual property right, by whatever name called, in or outside India, for any invention based on any research or information on a biological resource which is accessed from India, including those deposited in repositories outside India, or traditional knowledge associated thereto, shall register with the National Biodiversity Authority before grant of such intellectual property rights.
(1B) Any person covered under section 7 who has obtained intellectual property right, by whatever name called, in or outside India, for any invention based on any research or information on a biological resource which is accessed from India, including those deposited in repositories outside India, or traditional knowledge associated thereto, shall obtain prior approval of the National Biodiversity Authority at the time of commercialisation.] (2) The National Biodiversity Authority may, while granting the approval under this section, impose benefit sharing fee or royalty or both or impose conditions including the sharing of financial benefits arising out of the commercial utilisation of such rights.
(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person making an application for any right under any law relating to protection of plant varieties 2***.
(4) Where any right is granted under law referred to in sub-section (3), the concerned authority granting such right shall endorse a copy of such document granting the right to the National Biodiversity Authority.
3[7. Prior intimation to State Biodiversity Board for accessing biological resource for certain purposes.— (1) No person, other than the person covered under sub-section (2) of section 3, shall access any biological resource and its associated knowledge for commercial utilisation, without giving prior intimation to the concerned State Biodiversity Board, but such access shall be subject to the provisions of clause (b) of section 23 and sub-section (2) of section 24:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the codified traditional knowledge, cultivated medicinal plants and its products, local people and communities of the area, including growers and cultivators of biodiversity and to vaids, hakims and registered AYUSH practitioners only who have been practicing indigenous medicines, including Indian systems of medicine as profession for sustenance and livelihood.

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2023, s. 8, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
2. The words "enacted by the Parliament" omitted by s. 8, ibid., (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).

(2) In the case of cultivated medicinal plants, the exemption under sub-section (1) shall be available only if a certificate of origin is obtained from the Biodiversity Management Committee in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Biodiversity Management Committee shall, on the basis of entries made in such books, maintained in such manner, issue the certificate of origin under subsection (2) in such manner as may be prescribed.]
CHAPTER III
NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY AUTHORITY
8. Establishment of National Biodiversity Authority.—(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be established by the Central Government for the purposes of this Act, a body to be called the National Biodiversity Authority.
(2) The National Biodiversity Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
1[(3) The head office of the National Biodiversity Authority shall be at Chennai and the National Biodiversity Authority may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, establish offices at other places in India.] (4) The National Biodiversity Authority shall consist of the following members, namely:— 2[(a) a Chairperson, who shall be an eminent person having adequate knowledge, expertise and experience in the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity and in matters relating to fair and equitable sharing of benefits, to be appointed by the Central Government;
(b) sixteen ex officio members to be appointed by the Central Government, representing the Ministries dealing with— (i) Agricultural Research and Education;
(ii) Agriculture and Farmers Welfare;
(iii) Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha, Sowa Rigpa, Yoga and Naturopathy and Homoeopathy;
(iv) Biotechnology;
(v) Environment and Climate Change;
(vi) Forests and Wildlife;
(vii) Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education;
(viii) Earth Sciences;
(ix) Panchayati Raj;
(x) Science and Technology;
(xi) Scientific and Industrial Research;
(xii) Tribal Affairs;
(c) four representatives from State Biodiversity Boards on rotational basis;] (d) five non-official members to be appointed from amongst 3[experts including legal experts] and scientists having special knowledge of, or experience in, matters relating to conservation of biological diversity, sustainable use of biological resources and 4[fair and equitable] sharing of benefits arising out of the use of biological resources, representatives of industry, conservers, creators and knowledge-holders of biological resources.

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2023, s. 10, for sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for clauses (a), (b) and (c) (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
3. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “specialists” (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
4. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “equitable” (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).

1[(e) a Member-Secretary, who shall have experience in matters relating to biodiversity conservation, to be appointed by the Central Government.]
9. Conditions of service of 2[Chairperson, members and Member-Secretary.]—The term of office and conditions of service of the Chairperson and the other members other than ex officio members of the National Biodiversity Authority 3[and of Member-Secretary] shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
10. Chairperson to be Chief Executive of National Biodiversity Authority.—The Chairperson shall be the Chief Executive of the National Biodiversity Authority and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed.
4[10A. Member Secretary.— (1) The Member-Secretary shall be the chief coordinating officer and the convener of the National Biodiversity Authority and shall assist that Authority in the discharge of its functions under this Act.
(2) The Member-Secretary shall perform such other functions as may be prescribed.]
11. Removal of members.—The Central Government may remove from the National Biodiversity Authority any member who, in its opinion, has— (a) been adjudged as an insolvent; or (b) been convicted of an offence which involves moral turpitude; or (c) become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a member; or (d) so abused his position as to render his continuance in office detrimental to the public interest;
or (e) acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as a member.
12. Meetings of National Biodiversity Authority.—(1) The National Biodiversity Authority shall meet at such time and place and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at its meetings) as may be prescribed.
(2) The Chairperson of the National Biodiversity Authority shall preside at the meetings of the National Biodiversity Authority.
(3) If for any reason the Chairperson is unable to attend any meeting of the National Biodiversity Authority, any member of the National Biodiversity Authority chosen by the members present at the meeting shall preside at the meeting.
(4) All questions which come before any meeting of the National Biodiversity Authority shall be decided by a majority of votes of the members present and voting and in the event of equality of votes, the Chairperson or, in his absence, the person presiding, shall have and exercise a second or casting vote.
(5) Every member who is in any way, whether directly, indirectly or personally, concerned or interested in a matter to be decided at the meeting shall disclose the nature of his concern or interest and after such disclosure, the member concerned or interested shall not attend that meeting.
(6) No act or proceeding of the National Biodiversity Authority shall be invalidated merely by reason of— (a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the National Biodiversity Authority; or (b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member; or (c) any irregularity in the procedure of the National Biodiversity Authority not affecting the merits of the case.

2. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for “Chairperson and members” (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).

13. Committees of National Biodiversity Authority.—(1) The National Biodiversity Authority may constitute a committee to deal with agro-biodiversity.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “agro-biodiversity” means biological diversity of agriculture related species and their wild relatives.
1[(2) The National Biodiversity Authority may also constitute such number of committees as it deems fit for the efficient discharge of its duties and performance of its functions under this Act.] (3) A committee constituted under this section shall co-opt such number of persons, who are not the members of the National Biodiversity Authority, as it may think fit and the persons so co-opted shall have the right to attend the meetings of the committee and take part in its proceedings but shall not have the right to vote.
(4) The persons appointed as members of the committee under sub-section (2) shall be entitled to receive such allowances or fees for attending the meetings of the committee as may be fixed by the Central Government.
14. Officers and employees of National Biodiversity Authority.—(1) The National Biodiversity Authority may appoint such officers and other employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.
(2) The terms and conditions of service of such officers and other employees of the National Biodiversity Authority shall be such as may be specified by regulations.
15. Authentication of orders and decisions of National Biodiversity Authority.—All orders and decisions of the National Biodiversity Authority shall be authenticated by the signature of the Chairperson 2[or Member-Secretary] or any other member authorised by the National Biodiversity Authority in this behalf and all other instruments executed by the National Biodiversity Authority shall be authenticated by the 3[signature of Member-Secretary or an officer] of the National Biodiversity Authority authorised by it in this behalf.
16. Delegation of powers.—The National Biodiversity Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to any member 4[or Member-Secretary], officer of the National Biodiversity Authority or any other person subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of the powers and functions under this Act (except the power to prefer an appeal under section 50 and the power to make regulations under section 64) as it may deem necessary.
17. Expenses of National Biodiversity Authority to be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.—The salaries and allowances payable to the members and the administrative expenses of the National Biodiversity Authority including salaries, allowances and pension payable to, or in respect of, the officers and other employees of the National Biodiversity Authority shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
CHAPTER IV
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY AUTHORITY
18. Functions and powers of National Biodiversity Authority—5[(1) The National Biodiversity Authority shall, with the approval of the Central Government, make regulations to provide for access to biological resources and traditional knowledge associated thereto, and for determination of fair and equitable sharing of benefits.
(2) It shall be the duty of the National Biodiversity Authority to regulate any activity referred to in sections 3, 4 and 6 by granting or rejecting approvals.] (3) The National Biodiversity Authority may—

3. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “signature of an officer” (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).

(a) advise the Central Government on matters relating to the conservation of biodiversity, sustainable use of its components and 1[fair and equitable] sharing of benefits arising out of the utilisation of biological resources;
(b) advise the State Governments in the selection of areas of biodiversity importance to be notified under sub-section (1) of section 37 as 2[biodiversity heritage sites] and measures for the management of such heritage sites;
3[(ba) advise the State Biodiversity Boards on any matter relating to the implementation of the Act;] (c) perform such other functions as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
4[(4) The National Biodiversity Authority may, on behalf of the Central Government, take any measures necessary to oppose the grant of intellectual property rights in any country outside India on any biological resource which is found in or brought from India, including those deposited in repositories outside India, or traditional knowledge associated thereto accessed.]
CHAPTER V
APPROVAL BY THE NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY AUTHORITY
19. Approval by National Biodiversity Authority for undertaking certain activities.—(1) Any person referred to in sub-section (2) of section 3 who intends to obtain any biological resource occurring in India or knowledge associated thereto for research or for commercial utilisation or for bio-survey and bio-utilisation or transfer the results of any research relating to biological resources occurring in, or obtained from, India, shall make application in such form and payment of such fees as may be prescribed, to the National Biodiversity Authority.
5[(2) Any person referred to in sub-section (2) of section 3 who intends to apply for a patent or any other form of intellectual property rights, whether in India or outside India, referred to in sub-section (1) of section 6, may make an application to the National Biodiversity Authority in such form, on payment of such fee, and in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(2A) Any person referred to in sub-section (1A) of section 6 shall register with the National Biodiversity Authority at the time of making application under sub-section (2), and persons referred to in sub-section (1B) of section 6 shall obtain prior approval from the National Biodiversity Authority at the time of commercialisation.] (3) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the National Biodiversity Authority may, after making such enquiries as it may deem fit and if necessary after consulting an expert committee constituted for this purpose, by order, grant approval subject to any regulations made in this behalf and subject to such terms and conditions as it may deem fit, including the imposition of charges by way of royalty or for reasons to be recorded in writing, reject the application:
Provided that no such order for rejection shall be made without giving an opportunity of being heard to the person affected.
6[(3A) The National Biodiversity Authority shall, while granting approval under this section, determine the benefit sharing in such manner as may be specified by regulations made in this behalf:
Provided that if the National Biodiversity Authority is of the opinion that such an activity is detrimental or contrary to the objectives of conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity or fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of such activity, it may, by order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, prohibit or restrict any such activity:

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2023, s. 16, for “equitable” (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
2. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for “heritage sites” (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).

Provided further that no such order for rejection shall be made without giving an opportunity of being heard to the person concerned.] 1[(4) The National Biodiversity Authority shall place in public domain details of every approval granted or rejected under this section.]
20. Transfer of 2[results of research].—3[(1) Any person or entity who intends to transfer the results of any research on biological resources, which are found in or brought from India, including those deposited in repositories outside India or traditional knowledge associated thereto, to persons referred to under sub-section (2) of section 3 for monetary consideration or otherwise, he shall make an application to the National Biodiversity Authority in such form, and on payment of such fee, as may be prescribed.] (2) Any person who intends to transfer 4[the results of research] referred to in sub-section (1) shall make an application in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed to the National Biodiversity Authority.
5[(3) On receipt of an application under sub-section (2), the National Biodiversity Authority may, after making such enquiries, as it deems fit, by order, grant approval, subject to such terms and conditions, as it may deem fit, including benefit sharing or otherwise, as per the guidelines or for reasons to be recorded in writing, or reject the application:
Provided that no such order for rejection shall be made without giving an opportunity of being heard to the person concerned.
(4) The National Biodiversity Authority shall place in public domain the details of every approval granted or rejected under this section.]
21. Determination of 6[fair and equitable] benefit sharing by National Biodiversity Authority.— 7[(1) The National Biodiversity Authority shall, while determining benefit sharing for the approval granted under this Act, ensure that the terms and conditions subject to which the approval is granted secures fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the use of accessed biological resources, their derivatives, innovations and practices associated with their use and applications and knowledge relating thereto in accordance with mutually agreed terms and conditions between the person applying for such approval, and the Biodiversity Management Committee represented by the National Biodiversity Authority.] (2) The National Biodiversity Authority shall, subject to any regulations made in this behalf, determine the benefit sharing which shall be given effect in all or any of the following manner, namely:— (a) grant of joint ownership of intellectual property rights to the National Biodiversity Authority, or where benefit claimers are identified, to such benefit claimers;
(b) transfer of technology;
(c) location of production, research and development units in such areas which will facilitate better living standards to the benefit claimers;
(d) association of Indian scientists, benefit claimers and the local people with research and development in biological resources and bio-survey and bio-utilisation;
(e) setting up of venture capital fund for aiding the cause of benefit claimers;
(f) payment of monetary compensation and other non-monetary benefits to the benefit claimers as the National Biodiversity Authority may deem fit.

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2023, s. 17, for sub-section (4) (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
2. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for “biological resource or knowledge” (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
4. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for “any biological resource or knowledge associated thereto” (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
6. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for “equitable” (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).

(3) Where any amount of money is ordered by way of benefit sharing, the National Biodiversity Authority may direct the amount to be deposited in the National Biodiversity Fund:
1[Provided that where biological resource or associated knowledge was a result of access from an individual or group of individuals or organisations, the National Biodiversity Authority may direct that the amount shall be paid directly to such benefit claimer or organisation in accordance with the terms of any agreement and in such manner as it deems fit.] (4) For the purposes of this section, the National Biodiversity Authority shall, in consultation with the Central Government, by regulations, frame guidelines.
CHAPTER VI
STATE BIODIVERSITY BOARD
22. Establishment of State Biodiversity Board.—(1) With effect from such date as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established by that Government for the purposes of this Act, a Board for the State to be known as the (name of the State) Biodiversity Board.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no State Biodiversity Board shall be constituted for a Union territory and in relation to a Union territory, the National Biodiversity Authority shall exercise the powers and perform the functions of a State Biodiversity Board for that Union territory:
Provided that in relation to any Union territory, the National Biodiversity Authority may delegate all or any of its powers or functions under this sub-section to such person or group of persons 2[or body] as the Central Government may specify.
(3) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(4) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:— 3[(a) a Chairperson, who shall be an eminent person having adequate knowledge, expertise and experience in the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity and in matters relating to fair and equitable sharing of benefits, to be appointed by the State Government;
(b) not more than seven ex officio members to be appointed by the State Government to represent the concerned departments of the State Government, including departments dealing Panchayati Raj and tribal affiairs;
(c) not more than five non-official members to be appointed from amongst experts, including legal experts, scientists having special knowledge, expertise and work experience in matters relating to conservation of biological diversity, sustainable use of biological resources and fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the use of biological resources.] (5) The head office of the State Biodiversity Board shall be at such place as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
23. Functions of State Biodiversity Board.—The functions of the State Biodiversity Board shall be to— 4[(a) advise the State Government on matters relating to the conservation of biodiversity, sustainable use of its components and fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the utilisation of biological resources or traditional knowledge associated thereto, in conformity with the regulations or guidelines if any, issued by the Central Government or the National Biodiversity Authority;
(b) regulate any activity referred to in section 7 by granting or rejecting approvals;

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2023, s. 19, for the proviso (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).

3. Subs. by s. 20, ibid., for clauses (a), (b) and (c) (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
4. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for clauses (a) and (b) (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).

(ba) determine the fair and equitable sharing of benefits as provided under the regulations made in this behalf by the National Biodiversity Authority while granting approvals;] (c) perform such other functions as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act or as may be prescribed by the State Government.
24. Power of State Biodiversity Board to restrict certain activities violating the objectives of conservation, etc.—1[(1) Any person other than the person referred to in sub-section (2) of section 3, intending to undertake any activity covered under section 7, shall give prior intimation to the State Biodiversity Board, in such form as may be prescribed by the State Government.] 2[(2) If the State Biodiversity Board is of the opinion that such activity is detrimental or contrary to the objectives of conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity of fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of such activity, it may by order, restrict or reject such activity:
Provided that no such order or rejection shall be made without giving an opportunity of being heard to the person concerned.
(3) The State Biodiversity Board shall place in public domain the details of every approval granted or rejected under this section.]
25. Provisions of sections 9 to 17 to apply with modifications to State Biodiversity Board.—The provisions of sections 9 to 17 shall apply to a State Biodiversity Board and shall have effect subject to the following modifications, namely:— (a) references to the Central Government shall be construed as references to the State Government;
(b) references to the National Biodiversity Authority shall be construed as references to the State Biodiversity Board;
(c) reference to the Consolidated Fund of India shall be construed as reference to the Consolidated Fund of the State.
CHAPER VII FINANACE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT OF NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY AUTHORITY
26. Grants or loans by the Central Government.—The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the National Biodiversity Authority by way of grants or loans such sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
27. Constitution of National Biodiversity Fund—(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the National Biodiversity Fund and there shall be credited thereto— (a) any grants and loans made to the National Biodiversity Authority under section 26;
3[(b) all sums including charges and benefit sharing amount received by the National Biodiversity Authority;] (c) all sums received by the National Biodiversity Authority from such other sources as may be decided upon by the Central Government.
(2) The Fund shall be 4[utilised] for— (a) channeling benefits to the benefit claimers;
5[(b) conservation, promotion and sustainable use of biological resources;

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2023, s. 22, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
3. Subs. by s. 23, ibid., for clause (b) (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
5. Subs. by s. 23, ibid., for clauses (b) and (c) (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).

(c) socio-economic development of areas from where such biological resources or traditional knowledge associated thereto have been accessed in consultation with the Biodiversity Management Committee:
Provided that when it is not possible to identify the area from where the biological resources or traditional knowledge associated thereto have been accessed, the fund shall be utilised for socio-economic development of the area where such biological resources occur;
(d) activities to meet the purposes of the Act.]
28. Annual report of National Biodiversity Authority.—The National Biodiversity Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such time each financial year as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial year and furnish, to the Central Government, before such date as may be prescribed, its audited copy of accounts together with auditors’ report thereon.
29. Budget, accounts and audit.—(1) The National Biodiversity Authority shall prepare a budget, maintain proper accounts and other relevant records (including the accounts and other relevant records of the National Biodiversity Fund) and prepare an annual statement of account in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the National Biodiversity Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the National Biodiversity Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the National Biodiversity Authority shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the National Biodiversity Authority.
(4) The accounts of the National Biodiversity Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report there on shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government.
30. Annual report to be laid before parliament.—The Central Government shall cause the annual report and auditor's report to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER VIII FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT OF STATE BIODIVERSITY BOARD
31. Grants of money by State Government to State Biodiversity Board.—The State Government may, after due appropriation made by the State Legislature by law in this behalf, pay to the State Biodiversity Board by way of grants or loans such sums of money as the State Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
32. Constitution of State Biodiversity Fund.—(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the State Biodiversity Fund and there shall be credited thereto— (a) any grants and loans made to the State Biodiversity Board under section 31;
(b) any grants or loans made by the National Biodiversity Authority;
1[(c) all sums including charges and benefit sharing amount received by the State Biodiversity Board and from such other sources as may be decided by the State Government;] (2) The State Biodiversity Fund shall be 2[utilised] for— (a) the management and conservation of heritage sites;

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2023, s. 24, for clause (c) (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).

1[(aa) channelling benefits to the benefit claimers;] (b) compensating or rehabilitating any section of the people economically affected by notification under sub-section (1) of section 37;
2[(c) conservation, promotion and sustainable use of biological resources;] 3[(d) socio-economic development of areas from where such biological resources or traditional knowledge associated thereto have been accessed in consultation with the Biodiversity Management Committee or local body concerned:
Provided that when it is not possible to identify the area from where the biological resources or associated knowledge have been accessed, the fund shall be utilised for socio-economic development of the area where such biological resources occur;] 4[(e) making grants or loans to the Biodiversity Management Committees;
(f) the activities to meet the purposes of the Act.]
33. Annual report of State Biodiversity Board.—The State Biodiversity Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial year, and submit a copy thereof to the State Government.
34. Audit of accounts of State Biodiversity Board.—The accounts of the State Biodiversity Board shall be maintained and audited in such manner as may, in consultation with the Accountant-General of the State, be prescribed and the State Biodiversity Board shall furnish, to the State Government, before such date as may be prescribed, its audited copy of accounts together with auditor’s report thereon.
35. Annual report of State Biodiversity Board to be laid before State Legislature.—The State Government shall cause the annual report and auditor's report to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before the House of State Legislature.
CHAPTER IX
DUTIES OF THE CENTRAL AND THE STATE GOVERNMENTS
36. 5[Central Government to develop national strategies and plans for conservation, promotion and sustainable use of biological diversity.]—(1) The Central Government shall 6[in consultation with the State Government and Union territories] develop national strategies, plans, programmes for the conservation and promotion and sustainable use of biological diversity including measures for identification and monitoring of areas rich in biological resources, promotion of in situ, and ex situ, 7[conservation of biological resources, including cultivars, folk varieties and landraces, incentives] for research, training and public education to increase awareness with respect to biodiversity.
(2) Where the Central Government has reason to believe that any area rich in biological diversity, biological resources and their habitats is being threatened by overuse, abuse or neglect, it shall issue directives to the concerned State Government to take immediate ameliorative measures, offering such State Government any technical and other assistance that is possible to be provided or needed.
(3) The Central Government shall, as far as practicable wherever it deems appropriate, integrate the conservation, promotion and sustainable use of biological diversity into relevant 8[sectoral policies or cross-sectoral plans and programmes].
(4) The Central Government shall undertake measures,—

2. Subs. by s. 24, ibid., for clause (c) (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
3. Subs. by s. 24, ibid., for clause (d) (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
4. Subs. by s. 24, ibid., for clause (e) (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
5. Subs. by s. 25, ibid., for the marginal heading (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
7. Subs. by s. 25, ibid., for “conservation of biological resources, incentives” (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
8. Subs. by s. 25, ibid., for “sectoral or cross-sectoral plans, programmes and policies” (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).

(i) wherever necessary, for assessment of environmental impact of that project which is likely to have adverse effect on biological diversity, with a view to avoid or minimise such effects and where appropriate provide for public participation in such assessment;
(ii) to regulate, manage or control the risks associated with the use and release of living modified organisms resulting from biotechnology likely to have adverse impact on the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity and human health.
(5) The Central Government shall endeavour to respect and protect the knowledge of local people relating to biological diversity, as recommended by the National Biodiversity Authority through such measures, which may include registration of such knowledge at the local, State or national levels, and other measures for protection, including sui generis system.
1[(6) The Central Government shall involve the National Biodiversity Authority or State Biodiversity Boards to undertake measures for conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity or traditional knowledge associated thereto.] Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— (a) “ex situ conservation” means the conservation of components of biological diversity outside their natural habitats;
(b) “in situ conservation” means the conservation of ecosystems and natural habitats and the maintenance and recovery of viable populations of species in their natural surroundings and, in the case of domesticated or cultivated species, in the surroundings where they have developed their distinctive properties.
2[36A. Measures to be taken by National Biodiversity Authority.—The Central Government may authorise National Biodiversity Authority or any other organisation to take any measure necessary to monitor and regulate within the territory of India, the access and utilisation of biological resources obtained from a foreign country in order to meet the international obligations to which India is a signatory.
36B. State Government to develop strategies and plans for conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity.—(1) The State Government shall develop strategies, plans, programmes for the conservation and promotion and sustainable use of biological diversity, including measures for indentification and monitoring of areas rich in biological resources, promotion of in situ, and ex situ, conservation of biological resources, including cultivars, folk varieties and landraces, incentives for research, training and public education to increase awareness with respect to biodiversity, in conformity with the national strategies, plans and programmes.
(2) The State Government shall, as far as practicable, wherever it deems appropriate, integrate the conservation, promotion and sustainable use of biological diversity into relevant sectoral policies or crosssectoral plans and programmes.]
37. Biodiversity heritage sites.—3[(1) Without prejudice to any other law for the time being in force, based on the recommendations of the State Biodiversity Board, the State Government may, from time to time, notify in the Official Gazette, areas of biodiversity importance as biodiversity heritage sites under this Act:
Provided that the State Biodiversity Board shall consult the local body and the Biodiversity Management Committee concerned before making such recommendations.] (2) The State Government, in consultation with the Central Government, may frame rules for the management and conservation of all the 4[biodiversity heritage sites].
(3) The State Government shall frame schemes for compensating or rehabilitating any person or section of people economically affected by such notification.

4. Subs. by s. 27, ibid., for “heritage sites” (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).

38. Power of Central Government to notify threatened species.—Without prejudice to the provisions of any other law for the time being in force, the Central Government, in consultation with the concerned State Government, may from time to time notify any species which is on the verge of extinction or likely to become extinct in the near future as a threatened species and prohibit or regulate collection thereof for any purpose and take appropriate steps to rehabilitate and preserve those species.
1[Provided that the Central Government may delegate such power to the State Government:
Provided further that where such power is delegated to the State Government, it shall consult the National Biodiversity Authority before issuing any such notification.]
39. Power of Central Government to designate repositories.—(1) The Central Government may, in consultation with the National Biodiversity Authority, designate institutions as repositories under this Act for different categories of biological resources.
(2) The repositories shall keep in safe custody the biological material including voucher specimens deposited with them.
(3) Any new tax on discovered by any person shall be notified to the repositories or any institution designated for this purpose and he shall deposit the voucher specimens with such repository or institution.
2[40. Provisions of this Act not to apply in certain cases. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government may, in consultation with the National Biodiversity Authority, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that all or any of the provisions of this Act shall not apply to biological resources when normally traded as commodities or to the items derived from them, including agricultural wastes, as notified and cultivated medicinal plants and their products for entities covered under section 7, registered as per the regulations made or as may prescribed:
Provided that no exemption shall be made for the activities referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 6.]

CHAPTER X
BIODIVERSITY MANAGEMENT COMMITTEES
41. Constitution of Biodiversity Management Committee.—3[(1) Every local body at the Gram Panchayat level in the rural areas and at the Nagar Panchayat or Municipal Committee at Municipal Corporation level in the urban areas shall constitute a Biodiversity Management Committee (by whatever name called) within its area for the purpose of promoting conservation, sustainable use and documentation of biological diversity including preservation of habitats, conservation of landraces, folk varieties, farmers' varieties, and cultivars, domesticated stocks and breeds of animals, living things in water bodies and microorganisms and chronicling of knowledge relating to biological diversity:
Provided that the State Government may constitute Biodiversity Management Committees at the intermediate or district Panchayat level for achieving the objectives of the Act.
(1A) The functions of Biodiversity Management Committee so constituted shall include conservation, sustainable use and documentation of biological diversity, including conservation of habitats, landraces, folk varieties, cultivars, domesticated breeds of animals, and microorganisms, and chronicling of traditional knowledge associated thereto relating to biological diversity (1B) The composition of the Biodiversity Management Committee shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government:
Provided that the number of members of the said Committee shall not be less than seven and not exceeding eleven.] (2) The National Biodiversity Authority and the State Biodiversity Boards shall consult the Biodiversity Management Committees while taking any decision relating to the use of biological

resources 1[or traditional knowledge associated thereto] occurring within the territorial jurisdiction of the Biodiversity Management Committee.
2[Explanation.—For the purposes of this section— (a) “cultivar” means a veriety of plant that has originated and persisted under cultivation or was specifically bred for the purpose of cultivation;
(b) “folk variety” means a cultivated variety of plant that was developed, grown and exchanged informally among farmers;
(c) “landrace” means primitive cultivar that was grown by ancient farmers and their successors;
(d) “farmers' variety” means a veriety which— (i) has been traditionally cultivated and evolved by the farmers in their field; or (ii) is a wild relative or landrace of a veriety about which the farmers possess the common knowledge.] (3) The Biodiversity Management Committees may levy charges by way of collection fees from any person for accessing or collecting any biological resource for commercial purposes from areas falling within its territorial jurisdiction.
CHAPTER XI
LOCAL BIODIVERSITY FUND
42. Grants to Local Biodiversity Fund.—The State Government may, after due appropriation made by State Legislature by law in this behalf, pay to the Local Biodiversity Funds by way of grants or loans such sums of money as the State Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
43. Constitution of Local Biodiversity Fund.—(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Local Biodiversity Fund at every area notified by the State Government where any institution of self-government is functioning and there shall be credited thereto— (a) any grants and loans made under section 42;
(b) any grants or loans made by the National Biodiversity Authority;
(c) any grants or loans made by the State Biodiversity Boards;
(d) fees referred to in sub-section (3) of section 41 received by the Biodiversity Management Committees;
3[(e) benefit sharing amount and all other sums received by the Local Biodiversity Fund from such other sources as may be decided by the State Government.] 4[44. Application of Local Biodiversity Fund.— (1) The Local Biodiversity Fund shall be utilised in accordance with the regulations and the guidelines made in this behalf, for— (a) the conservation and promotion of biodiversity including restoration of areas falling within the jurisdiction of concerned local body;
(b) the socio-economic development of the community without compromising the conservation concerns; and (c) the administrative expenses of the Biodiversity Management Committee.
(2) The Fund shall be utilised in such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government.]

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2023, s. 30, for “and knowledge associated with such resources” (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
3. Subs. by s. 31, ibid., for clause (e) (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).

1[45. Annual statement of Biodiversity Management Committees.— 45. The custodian of the Local Biodiversity Fund shall prepare, in such form and during each financial year at such time as may be prescribed by the State Government, its annual statement giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial year, and submit the same to the local body concerned with a copy to the State Biodiversity Board.] 2[46. Audit of accounts of Biodiversity Management Committees.— (1) The Biodiversity Management Committee shall maintain the accounts which shall be audited in such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government.
(2) The Biodiversity Management Committee shall furnish to the local body concerned and to the State Biodiversity Board, before such date as may be prescribed by the State Government, its audited copy of accounts together with auditor's report thereon.]
47. Annual report, etc., of the Biodiversity Management Committee to be submitted to District Magistrate.—Every local body constituting a Biodiversity Management Committee under sub-section (1) of section 41, shall cause, the annual report and audited copy of accounts together with auditor's report thereon referred to in sections 45 and 46, respectively and relating to such Committee to be submitted to the District Magistrate having jurisdiction over the area of the local body.
CHAPTER XII
MISCELLANEOUS
48. National Biodiversity Authority to be bound by the directions given by Central Government.—(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the National Biodiversity Authority shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time:
Provided that the National Biodiversity Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given opportunity to express its views before any direction is given under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not shall be final.
49. Power of State Government to give directions.—(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the State Biodiversity Board shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the State Government may give in writing to it from time to time:
Provided that the State Biodiversity Board shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views before any direction is given under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the State Government whether a question is one of policy or not shall be final.
50. Settlement of disputes 3***.—(1) If a dispute arises between the National Biodiversity Authority and a State Biodiversity Board, the said Authority or the Board, as the case may be, may prefer an appeal to the Central Government within such time as may be prescribed.
(2) Every appeal made under sub-section (1) shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(3) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government:
Provided that before disposing of an appeal, the parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(4) If a dispute arises between the State Biodiversity Boards, the Central Government shall refer the same to the National Biodiversity Authority.

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2023, s. 33, for section 45 (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
3. The words “between State Biodiversity Boards” omitted by s. 35, ibid., (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).

(5) While adjudicating any dispute under sub-section (4), the National Biodiversity Authority shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(6) The National Biodiversity Authority shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this section, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) in respect of the following matters, namely:— (a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(e) reviewing its decisions;
(f) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex parte;
(g) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application for default or any order passed by it ex parte;
(h) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(7) Every proceeding before the National Biodiversity Authority shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section 196, of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the National Biodiversity Authority shall be deemed to be a civil court for all the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXV1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
51. Members, officers, etc., of National Biodiversity Authority and State Biodiversity Board deemed to be public servants.—All members, officers and other employees of the National Biodiversity Authority or the State Biodiversity Board shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
52. Appeal.—Any person, aggrieved by any determination of 1[fair and equitable sharing of benefits or order or direction] of the National Biodiversity Authority or a State Biodiversity Board under this Act, may file an appeal to the High Court within thirty days from the date of communication to him, of the determination or order of the National Biodiversity Authority or the State Biodiversity Board, as the case may be:
Provided that the High Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further period not exceeding sixty days.
2[Provided further that nothing contained in this section shall apply on and from the commencement of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 (19 of 2010):
Provided also that any appeal pending before the High Court, before the commencement of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 (19 of 2010), shall continue to be heard and disposed of by the High Court as if the National Green Tribunal had not been established under section 3 of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010.] 2[52A. Appeal to National Green Tribunal.—Any person aggrieved by any determination of benefit sharing or order of the National Biodiversity Authority or a State Biodiversity Board under this Act, on or after the commencement of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 (19 of 2010), may file an appeal to the National Green Tribunal establishment under section 3 of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010, in accordance with the provisions of that Act.]
53. Execution of determination or order.—Every determination of 3[fair and equitable sharing of benefits] or order made by the National Biodiversity Authority or a State Biodiversity Board under this Act or the order made by the High Court 4[or the National Green Tribunal] in any appeal against any

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2023, s. 36, for “benefit sharing or order” (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
2. Ins. by Act 19 of 2010, s. 36 and Schedule III (w. e. f. 18-10-2010).
3. Subs. by Act 10 of 2023, s. 37, for “benefit sharing” (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
4. Ins. by s. 37, ibid., (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).

determination or order of the National Biodiversity Authority or a State Biodiversity Board shall, on a certificate issued by any officer of the National Biodiversity Authority or a State Biodiversity Board or the Registrar of the High Court 1[or the Registrar of the National Green Tribunal], as the case may be, be deemed to be decree of the civil court and shall be executable in the same manner as a decree of that court.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 52, the expression “State Biodiversity Board” includes the person or group of persons 2[or body] to whom the powers or functions under sub-section (2) of section 22 have been delegated under the proviso to that sub-section and the certificate relating to such person or group of persons 2[or body] under this section shall be issued by such person or group of persons 2[or body], as the case may be.
54. Protection of action taken in good faith.—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central Government or the State Government or any officer of the Central Government or State Government or any member, officer or employee of the National Biodiversity Authority or the State Biodiversity Board for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.
3[55. Penalties.— If any person or entity covered under sub-section (2) of section 3 or section 7 contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the provisions of section 3 or section 4 or section 6 or section 7, such person shall be liable to pay penalty which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but which may extend to fifty lakh rupees, but where the damage caused exceeds the amount of penalty, such penalty shall be commensurate with the damage caused, and in case, the failure or contravention continues, an additional penalty may be imposed, which shall not exceed one crore rupees and such penalty shall be decided by the adjudicating officer appointed under section 55A.
55A. Adjudication of penalties. — (1) For the purposes of determining the penalties under section 55, the Central Government may appoint an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India or a Secretary to the State Government to be the adjudicating officer, to hold inquiry in the prescribed manner and to impose the penalty so determined:
Provided that the Central Government may appoint as many adjudicating officers as may be required.
(2) While holding an inquiry, the adjudicating officer shall have power to summon and enforce the attendance of any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case to give evidence or to produce any document, which in the opinion of the adjudicating officer, may be useful for, or relevant to, the subject-matter of the inquiry and if, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that the person concerned has failed to comply with the provisions of section 3 or section 4 or section 6 or section 7, he may impose such penalty as he thinks fit in accordance with the provisions of section 55:
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed without giving the person concerned an opportunity of being heard in the matter.
(3) Any person aggrieved by the order made by the adjudicating officer under sub-section (2) may prefer an appeal to the National Green Tribunal established under section 3 of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 (19 of 2010).
(4) Every appeal under sub-section (3) shall be filed within sixty days from the date on which the copy of the order made by the adjudicating officer is received by the aggrieved person.
(5) The National Green Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such order as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or setting aside the order appealed against.
55B. Power to enter, inspect, survey, etc.—Any authority or officer empowered by the Central Government may, for the purposes of carrying out inspection, survey or any such activity, have all or any of the following powers, namely:— (a) the power to enter upon any land, vehicle, or premises and to inspect, investigate, survey and collect information and make a map of the same and seize the materials and records;

1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2023, s. 37, (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
2. Ins. by s. 37, ibid., (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).

(b) the powers of a civil court to compel the attendance of anyone, including witnesses and production of documents and materials objects;
(c) the power to issue a search-warrant;
(d) the power to hold an inquiry and in the course of such inquiry, receive and record evidence;
(e) such other power as may be prescribed.]
56. Penalty for contravention of directions or orders of Central Government, State Government, National Biodiversity Authority and State Biodiversity Boards.—If any person contravenes any direction given or order made by the Central Government, the State Government, the National Biodiversity Authority or the State Biodiversity Board for which no punishment has been separately provided under this Act, he shall be punished with a fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and in case of a second or subsequent offence, with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees and in the case of continuous contravention with additional fine which may extend to two lakh rupees every day during which the default continues.
57. Offences by companies—(1) Where an offence or contravention under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence or contravention was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence or contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence or contravention was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence or contravention.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence or contravention under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence or contravention has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence or contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— (a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals;
and (b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
58. [Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable.]—Omitted by the Biological Diversity (Amendment) Act, 2023 (10 of 2023), s. 39 (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
59. Act to have effect in addition to other Acts.—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the provisions in any other law, for the time being in force, relating to forests or wildlife.
1[59A. Act not to apply to certain persons.—The provision of this Act shall not apply to any person who has been given any approval or granted any right under any law relating to protection of plant varieties enacted by Parliament to the extent that such approvals or rights given under that Act does not require similar approval under this Act.]
60. Power of Central Government to give directions to State Government.—The Central Government may give directions to any State Government as to the carrying into execution in the State of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule or regulation or order made thereunder.
61. Cognizance of offences.—No Court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on a 2[written complaint] made by—

2. Subs. by s. 41, ibid., for “complaint” (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).

(a) the Central Government or any authority or officer authorised in this behalf by that Government; or (b) 1[any person or a benefit claimer] who has given notice of not less than thirty days in the prescribed manner, of such offence and of his intention to make a complaint, to the Central Government or the authority or officer authorised as aforesaid.
62. Power of Central Government to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 2[(a) the manner of obtaining the certificate of origin under sub-section (2) of section 7;
(aa) the books on the basis of which the certificate of origin to be issued, the manner of maintaining such books and the manner of issuing such certificate under sub-section (3) of section 7;
(ab) the terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson, Member-Secretary and other members under section 9;] (b) powers and duties of the Chairperson under section 10;
3[(ba) the other functions to be performed by the Member-Secretary;] (c) procedure under sub-section (1) of section 12 in regard to transaction of business at meetings;
(d) form of application and payment of fees for undertaking certain activities under sub-section (1) of section 19;
(e) the form and manner of making an application 3[and payment of fees] under sub-section (2) of section 19;
3[(ea) form of application and payment of fees under sub-section (1) of section 20;] (f) form of application and the manner for transfer of biological resource or knowledge under sub-section (2) of section 20;
(g) form in which, and the time of each financial year at which, the annual report of the National Biodiversity Authority shall be prepared and the date before which its audited copy of accounts together with auditor's report thereon shall be furnished under section 28;
(h) form in which the annual statement of account shall be prepared under sub-section (1) of section 29;
(i) the time within which and the form in which, an appeal may be preferred, the procedure for disposing of an appeal and the procedure for adjudication, under section 50;
(j) the additional matter in which the National Biodiversity Authority may exercise powers of the civil court under clause (h) of sub-section (6) of section 50;
3[(ja) the manner of holding inquiry by the adjudicating officer under section 55A;
(jb) the other power under clause (e) of section 55B;] (k) the manner of giving notice under clause (b) of section 61;
(1) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to be made, by rules.
(3) Every rule made under this section and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2023, s. 41, for “any benefit claimer” (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).
2. Subs. by s. 42, ibid., for clause (a) (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).

Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
63. Power of State Government to make rules.—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— (a) the other functions to be performed by the State Biodiversity Board under clause (c) of section 23;
(b) the form in which the prior intimation shall be given under sub-section (1) of section 24;
(c) the form in which, and the time of each financial year at which, the annual report shall be prepared under section 33;
(d) the manner of maintaining and auditing the accounts of the State Biodiversity Board and the date before which its audited copy of the accounts together with auditor's report thereon shall be furnished under section 34;
(e) management and conservation of national heritage sites under section 37;
1[(ea) the composition of the Biodiversity Management Committee under sub-section (1B) of section 41;] (f) the manner of management and custody of the Local Biodiversity Fund and the purposes for which such Fund shall be 2[utilised] under sub-section (1) of section 44;
(g) the form of 3[annual statement] and the time at which such report shall be prepared during each financial year under section 45;
(h) the manner of maintaining and auditing the accounts of the Local Biodiversity Fund and the date before which its audited copy of the accounts together with auditor's report thereon shall be furnished under section 46;
(i) any other matter which is to be, or may be, specified.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House.
64. Power to make regulations.—The National Biodiversity Authority shall, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
65. Power to remove difficulties.—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.

3. Subs. by s. 43, ibid., for “annual report” (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).


================================================================================
SOURCE: THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS ACT, 1940 (23 of 1940)1.pdf
================================================================================

THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS ACT, 1940 (23 of 1940)1 [10th April, 1940]

An Act to regulate the import, manufacture, distribution and sale of drugs 2[and cosmetics].

Whereas it is expedient to regulate the 3[import, manufacture, distribution and sale] of drugs 2[and cosmetics];
And whereas the Legislatures of all the Provinces have passed resolutions in terms of section 103 of the Government of India Act, 1935 in relation to such of the above-mentioned matters and matters ancillary thereto as are enumerated in List II of the Seventh Schedule to the said Act;
It is hereby enacted as follows:—
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY

1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Drugs 4[and Cosmetics] Act, 1940.
(2) It extends to the whole of India 5[***].
(3) It shall come into force at once; but Chapter III shall take effect only from such date6 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, and Chapter IV shall take effect in a particular State only from such date6 as the State Government may, by like notification, appoint in this behalf:
7[Provided that in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, Chapter III shall take effect only from such date6 after the commencement of the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Act, 1972 (19 of 1972), as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf.]
2. Application of other laws not barred.—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 (2 of 1930), and any other law for the time being in force.

3. Definitions.—In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,— 1[(a) "7lAyurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drug" includes all medicines intended for internal or external use for or in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of 8[disease or disorder in human beings or animals, and manufactured] exclusively in accordance with the formulae described in, the authoritative books of 9[Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Tibb systems of medicine], specified in the First Schedule;] 5[(aa) "the Board" means— (i) in relation to 2[Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drug, the 6[Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board] constituted under section 33C; and (ii) in relation to any other drug or cosmetic, the Drugs Technical Advisory Board constituted under section 5;] 5[7[(aaa)] "cosmetic" means any article intended to be rubbed, poured, sprinkled or sprayed on, or introduced into, or otherwise applied to, the human body or any part thereof for cleansing, beautifying, promoting attractiveness, or altering the appearance, and includes any article intended for use as a component of cosmetic 10[***];] 9[(b) "drug" includes— 10[(i) all medicines for internal or external use of human beings or animals and all substances intended to be used for or in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of any disease or disorder in human beings or animals, including preparations applied on human body for the purpose of repelling insects like mosquitoes;] (ii) such substances (other than food) intended to affect the structure or any function of the human body or intended to be used for the destruction of 11 [vermin] or insects which cause disease in human beings or animals, as may be specified from time to time by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette;] 2[(iii) all substances intended for use as components of a drug including empty gelatin capsules; and (iv) such devices* intended for internal or external use in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of disease or disorder in human beings or

animals, as may be specified from time to time by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette, after consultation with the Board;] 3[(c) "Government Analyst" means— (i) in relation to 12[Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drug, a Government Analyst appointed by the Central Government or a State Government under section 33F;
and (ii) in relation to any other drug or cosmetic, a Government Analyst appointed by the Central Government or a State Government under section 20;] 6[(e) "Inspector" means— (i) in relation to 13[Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drug, an Inspector appointed by the Central Government or a State Government under section 33G; and (ii) in relation to any other drug or cosmetic, an Inspector appointed by the Central Government or a State Government under section 21;] 7[(f) "manufacture" in relation to any drug 14[or cosmetic] includes any process or part of a process for making, altering, ornamenting, finishing, packing, labelling, breaking up or otherwise treating or adopting any drug 8[or cosmetic] with a view to its 15[sale or distribution] but does not include the compounding or dispensing 10[of any drug, or the packing of any drug or cosmetic,] in the ordinary course of retail business; and "to manufacture" shall be construed accordingly;] '[(g)] "to import", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressionsmeans to bring into 16[India];
3[(h) "patent or proprietary medicine" means,-— (i) in relation to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani Tibb systems of medicine all formulations containing only such ingredients mentioned in the formulae described in the authoritative books of Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani Tibb systems of medicine specified in the First Schedule, but does not include a medicine which is administered by parenteral route and also a formulation included in the authoritative books as specified in clause (a);

(ii) in relation to any other systems of medicine, a drug which is a remedy or prescription presented in a form ready for internal or external administration of human beings or animals and which is not included in the edition of the Indian Pharmacopoeia for the time being or any other Pharmacopoeia authorised in this behalf by the Central Government after consultation with the Drugs Technical Advisory Board constituted under section 5;] 4[(i) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.] 6[3A. Construction of references to any law not in force or any functionary not in existence in the State of Jammu and Kashmir.—Any reference in this Act to any law which is not in force, or any functionary not in existence, in the Stateof Jammu and Kashmir, shall, in relation to that State, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law in force, or to the corresponding functionary in existence, in that State.]
4. Presumption as to poisonous substances.—Any substance specified as poisonous by rule made under Chapter III or Chapter IV '[or Chapter IVA] shall be deemed to be a poisonous substance for the purpose of Chapter III or Chapter IV ![or Chapter IVA], as the case may be.
CHAPTER II THE DRUGS TECHNICAL ADVISORY BOARD,
THE CENTRAL DRUGS LABORATORY AND
THE DRUGS CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE

5. The Drugs Technical Advisory Board.—(1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, constitute a Board (to be called the Drugs Technical Advisory Board) to advise the Central Government and the State Governments on technical matters arising out of the administration of this Act and to carry out the other functions assigned to it by this Act.

2[(2) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:— (i) the Director General of Health Services, ex officio, who shall be Chairman;
(ii) the Drugs Controller, India, ex officio;
(iii) the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory, Calcutta, ex officio;
(iv) the Director of the Central Research Institute, Kasauli, ex officio;
(v) the Director of the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, ex officio;
(vi) the President of the Medical Council of India, ex officio;

(vii) the President of the Pharmacy Council of India, ex officio;
(viii) the Director of the Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, ex officio;
(ix) two persons to be nominated by the Central Government from among persons who are in charge of drugs control in the States;
(x) one person, to be elected by the Executive Committee of the Pharmacy Council of India, from among teachers in pharmacy or pharmaceutical chemistry or Pharmacognosy on the staff of an Indian University or a college affiliated thereto;
(xi) one person, to be elected by the Executive Committee of the Medical Council of India, from among teachers in medicine or therapeutics on the staff of an Indian University or a college affiliated thereto;
(xii) one person to be nominated by the Central Government from the pharmaceutical industry;
(xiii) one pharmacologist to be elected by the Governing Body of the Indian Council of Medical Research;
(xiv) one person to be elected by the Central Council of the Indian Medical Association;
(xv) one person to be elected by the Council of the Indian Pharmaceutical Association;
(xvi) two persons holding the appointment of Government Analyst under this Act, to be nominated by the Central Government.] (3) The nominated and elected members of the Board shall hold office for three years, but shall be eligible for re-nomination and re-election:
1[Provided that the person nominated or elected, as the case may be, under clause (ix) or clause (x) or clause (xi) or clause (xvi) of sub-section (2) shall hold office for so long as he holds the appointment of the office by virtue of which he was nominated or elected to the Board.] (4) The Board may, subject to the previous approval of the Central Government, make bye-laws fixing a quorum and regulating its own procedure and the conduct of all business to be transacted by it.
(5) The Board may constitute sub-committees and may appoint to such subcommittees for such periods, not exceeding three years, as it may decide, or temporarily for the consideration of particular matters, persons who are not members of the Board.

(6) The functions of the Board may be exercised notwithstanding any vacancy therein.
(7) The Central Government shall appoint a person to be Secretary of the Board and shall provide the Board with such clerical and other staff as the Central Government considers necessary.
6. The Central Drugs Laboratory.—(1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, establish a Central Drugs Laboratory under the control of a Director to be appointed by the Central Government, to carry out the functions entrusted to it by this Act or any rules made under this Chapter:
Provided that, if the Central Government so prescribes, the functions of the Central Drugs Laboratory in respect of any drug or class of drugs 17[or cosmetic or class of cosmetics] shall be carried out at the Central Research Institute, Kasauli, or at any other prescribed Laboratory and the functions of the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory in respect of such drug or class of drugs 2[or such cosmetic or class of cosmetics] shall be exercised by the Director of that Institute or of that other Laboratory, as the case may be.
(2) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Board, make rules prescribing— (a) the functions of the Central Drugs Laboratory;
(b)[***] (c) [***] (d) the procedure for the submission of the said Laboratory 18[under Chapter IV or Chapter IVA] of samples of drugs 2[or cosmetics] for analysis or test, the forms of the Laboratory's reports thereon and the fees payable in respect of such reports;
(e) such other matters as may be necessary or expedient to enable the said Laboratory to carry out its functions;
(f) the matters necessary to be prescribed for the purposes of the proviso to sub-section (1).

STATE AMENDMENTS

Uttar Pradesh.—In section 6, in sub-section (1), after the existing proviso, insert the following proviso, namely.—

"Provided further that the State Government may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, direct that the functions of the Central Drugs Laboratory and of the Director may be carried out in Uttar Pradesh by such authority and such officer respectively as may be specified by the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette, and any reference in this Act to the Central Drugs Laboratory or the Director shall then be construed as a reference to such Authority or officer, as the case may be." [Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 47 of 1975, sec. 5 (w.e.f. 5-9-1975).] West Bengal.—In section 6, in sub-section (1), after the existing proviso, insert the following proviso, namely:— "Provided further that the State Government may, with the prior approval of the Central Government direct that the functions of the Central Drugs Laboratory and of the Director may be carried out in West Bengal by such Authority and such Officer respectively as may be specified by the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette, and any reference in this Act to the Central Drugs Laboratory or the Director shall then be construed to mean such Authority or officer, as the case may be." [Vide West Bengal Act 42 of 1973, sec. 5 (w.e.f. 29-4-1974).]
7. The Drugs Consultative Committee.—(1) The Central Government may constitute an advisory committee to be called "the Drugs Consultative Committee" to advise the Central Government, the State Governments and the Drugs Technical Advisory Board on any matter tending to secure uniformity throughout 19 [India] in the administration of this Act.
(2) The Drugs Consultative Committee shall consist of two representatives of the Central Government to be nominated by that Government and one representative of each State Government to be nominated by the State Government concerned.
(3) The Drugs Consultative Committee shall meet when required to do so by the Central Government and shall have power to regulate its own procedure.
2[7A. Sections 5 and 7 not to apply to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs.—Nothing contained in sections 5 and 7 shall apply to 20[Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drugs.]

CHAPTER III
IMPORT OF DRUGS AND COSMETICS

8. Standards of quality.—21[(1) For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression "standard quality" means— (a) in relation to a drug, that the drug complies with the standard set out in 22[the Second Schedule], and (b) in relation to a cosmetic, that the cosmetic complies with such standard as may be prescribed.] (2) The Central Government, after consultation with the Board and after giving by notification in the Official Gazette not less than three months' notice of its intention so to do, may by a like notification add to or otherwise amend 3[the Second Schedule], for the purposes of this Chapter, and thereupon 3[the Second Schedule] shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.
4[9. Misbranded drugs.—For the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be deemed to be misbranded,— (a) if it is so coloured, coated, powdered or polished that damage is concealed or if it is made to appear of better or greater therapeutic value than it really is; or (b) if it is not labelled in the prescribed manner; or (c) if its label or container or anything accompanying the drug bears any statement, design or device which makes any false claim for the drug or which is false or misleading in any particular.] 5[9A. Adulterated drugs.—For the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be deemed to be adulterated,— (a) if it consists, in whole or in part, of any filthy, putrid or decomposed substance; or (b) if it has been prepared, packed or stored under insanitary conditions whereby it may have been contaminated with filth or whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health; or (c) if its container is composed in whole or in part, of any poisonous or deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to health; or

(d) if it bears or contains, for purposes of colouring only, a colour other than one which is prescribed; or (e) if it contains any harmful or toxic substance which may render it injurious to health; or (f) if any substance has been mixed therewith so as to reduce its quality or strength.] 1[9B. Spurious drugs.—For the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be deemed to be spurious,— (a) if it is imported under a name which belongs to another drug; or (b) if it is an imitation of, or is a substitute for, another drug or resembles another drug in a manner likely to deceive or bears upon it or upon its label or container the name of another drug unless it is plainly and conspicuously marked so as to reveal its true character and its lack of identity with such other drug; or (c) if the label or container bears the name of an individual or company purporting to be the manufacturer of the drug, which individual or company is fictitious or does not exist; or (d) if it has been substituted wholly or in part by another drug or substance; or (e) if it purports to be the product of a manufacturer of whom it is not truly a product.] 2[9C. Misbranded cosmetics.—For the purposes of this Chapter, a cosmetic shall be deemed to be misbranded— (a) if it contains a colour which is not prescribed; or (b) if it is not labelled in the prescribed manner; or (c) if the label or container or anything accompanying the cosmetic bears any statement which is false or misleading in any particular.] 2[9D. Spurious cosmetics.—For the purposes of this Chapter, a cosmetic shall be deemed to be spurious,—

(a) if it is imported under a name which belongs to another cosmetic; or (b) if it is an imitation of, or is a substitute for, another cosmetic or resembles another cosmetic in a manner likely to deceive or bears upon it or upon its label or container the name of another cosmetic, unless it is plainly and conspicuously marked so as to reveal its true character and its lack of identity with such other cosmetic; or (c) if the label or container bears the name of an individual or a company purporting to be the manufacturer of the cosmetic which individual or company is fictitious or does not exist; or (d) if it purports to be the product of a manufacturer of whom it is not truly a product.]
10. Prohibition of import of certain drugs or cosmetics.—From such date23 as may be fixed by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette in this behalf, no person shall import— (a) any drug '[or cosmetic] which is not of standard quality;
2[(b) any misbranded drug 24[or misbranded or spurious cosmetic];] 4[(bb) any 25[adulterated or spurious] drug;] (c) any drug '[or cosmetic] for the import of which a licence is prescribed, otherwise than under, and in accordance with, such licence;
6[(d) any patent or proprietary medicine, unless there is displayed in the prescribed manner on the label or container thereof 26[the true formula or list of active ingredients contained in it together with the quantities thereof];] (e) any drug which by means of any statement, design or device accompanying it or by any other means, purports or claims to cure or mitigate any such disease or ailment, or to have any such other effect, as may be prescribed;
'[(ee) any cosmetic containing any ingredient which may render it unsafe or harmful or use under the directions indicated or recommended;]

(f) any drug '[or cosmetic] the import of which is prohibited by rule made under this Chapter:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the import, subject to prescribed conditions, of small quantities of any drug for the purpose of examination, test or analysis or for personal use:
Provided further that the Central Government may, after consultation with the Board, by notification in the Official Gazette, permit, subject to any conditions specified in the notification, the import of any drug or class of drugs not being of standard quality.
9[10A. Power of Central Government to prohibit import of drugs and cosmetics in public interest.—Without prejudice to any other provision contained in this Chapter, if the Central Government is satisfied that the use of any drug or cosmetic is likely to involve any risk to human beings or animals or that any drug does not have the therapeutic value claimed for it or contains ingredients and in such quantity for which there is no therapeutic justification and that in the public interest it is necessary or expedient so to do then, that Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, prohibit the import of such drug or cosmetic.]
11. Application of law relating to sea customs and powers of Customs Officers.—(1) The law for the time being in force relating to sea customs and to goods, the import of which is prohibited by section 18 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 (8 of 1878)27 shall, subject to the provisions of section 13 of this Act, apply in respect of drugs 28[and cosmetics] the import of which is prohibited under this Chapter, and officers of Customs and officers empowered under that Act to perform the duties imposed thereby on a 29[Commissioner of Customs] and other officers of Customs, shall have the same powers in respect of such drugs 2[and cosmetics] as they have for the time being in respect of such goods as aforesaid.
4[(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the 3[Commissioner of Customs] or any officer of the Government authorised by the Central Government in this behalf, may detain any imported package which he suspects to contain any drug 2[or cosmetic] the import of which is prohibited under this Chapter and shall forthwith report such detention to the Drugs Controller, India, and if necessary, forward the package or sample of any suspected drug 2[or cosmetic] found therein to the Central Drugs Laboratory.]

12. Power of Central Government to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may, 30[after consultation with or on the recommendation of the Board] and after previous publication by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Chapter:
Provided that consultation with the Board may be dispensed with if the Central Government is of opinion that circumstances have arisen which render it necessary to make rules without such consultation, but in such a case the Board shall be consulted within six months of the making of the rules and the Central Government shall take into consideration any suggestions which the Board may make in relation to the amendment of the said rules.] (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may— (a) specify the drugs or classes of drugs 31[or cosmetics or classes of cosmetics] for the import of which a licence is required, 32[and prescribe the form and conditions of such licences, the authority empowered to issue the same, the fees payable therefor and provide for the cancellation, or suspension of such licence in any case where any provision of this Chapter or the rules made thereunder is contravened or any of the conditions subject to which the licence is issued is not complied with];
(b) prescribe the methods of test or analysis to be employed in determining whether a drug 2[or cosmetic] is of standard quality;
(c) prescribe, in respect of biological and organometallic compounds, the units or methods of standardisation;
4[(cc) prescribe under clause (d) of 33[section 9A] the colour or colours which a drug may bear or contain for purposes of colouring;] (d) specify the diseases or ailments which an imported drug may not purport or claim 34[to prevent, cure or mitigate] and such other effects which such drug may not purport or claim to have;
(e) prescribe the conditions subject to which small quantities of drugs, the import of which is otherwise prohibited under this Chapter, may be imported for the purpose of examination, test or analysis or for personal use;

(f) prescribe the places at which drugs 2[or cosmetics] may be imported, and prohibit their import at any other place;
(g) require the date of manufacture and the date of expiry of potency to be clearly and truly stated on the label or container of any specified imported drug or class of such drug, and prohibit the import of the said drug or class of drug after the expiry of a specified period from the date of manufacture;
(h) regulate the submission by importers, and the securing, of samples of drugs 2[or cosmetics] for examination, test or analysis by the Central Drugs Laboratory, and prescribe the fees, if any, payable for such examination, test or analysis;
(i) prescribe the evidence to be supplied, whether by accompanying documents or otherwise, of the quality of drugs 35 [or cosmetics] sought to be imported, the procedure of officers of Customs in dealing with such evidence, and the manner of storage at places of import of drugs x[or cosmetics] detained pending admission;
(j) provide for the exemption, conditionally or otherwise, from all or any of the provisions of this Chapter and the rules made thereunder of drugs *[or cosmetics] imported for the purpose only of transport through, and export from, 36[India];
(k) prescribe the conditions to be observed in the packing in bottles, packages or other containers, of imported drugs 37[or cosmetics] 3[including the use of packing material which comes into direct contact with the drugs];
(1) regulate the mode of labelling drugs J[or cosmetics] imported for sale in packages, and prescribe the matters which shall or shall not be included in such labels;
(m) prescribe the maximum proportion of any poisonous substance which may be added to or contained in any imported drug, prohibit the import of any drug in which that proportion is exceeded, and specify substances which shall be deemed to be poisonous for the purposes of this Chapter and the rules made thereunder;

(n) require that the accepted scientific name of any specified drug shall be displayed in the prescribed manner on the label or wrapper of any imported, patent or proprietary medicine containing such drug;
(o) provide for the exemption, conditionally or otherwise, from all or any of the provisions of this Chapter or the rules made thereunder of any specified drug or class of drugs L[or cosmetics or class of cosmetics].
4[13. Offences.—(1) Whoever himself or by any other person on his behalf imports,— (a) any drug deemed to be adulterated under section 9 A or deemed to be a spurious drug under section 9B or any spurious cosmetic referred to in section 9D or any cosmetic of the nature referred to in clause (ee) of section 10 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and a fine which may extend to five thousand rupees;
(b) any drug or cosmetic other than a drug or cosmetic referred to in clause (a), the import of which is prohibited under section 10, or any rule made under this Chapter, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both;
(c) any drug or cosmetic in contravention of the provisions of any notification issued under section 10A, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
(2) Whoever having been convicted of an offence— (a) under clause (a) or clause (c) of sub-section (1), is again convicted of an offence under that clause, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both;
(b) under clause (b) of sub-section (1), is again convicted of an offence under that clause, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

(3) The punishment provided by this section shall be in addition to any penalty to which the offender may be liable under the provisions of section 11.]
14. Confiscation.—Where any offence punishable under section 13 has been committed, the consignment of the drugs 1[or cosmetics] in respect of which the offence has been committed shall be liable to confiscation.
15. Jurisdiction.—No Court inferior to that 38[of a Metropolitan Magistrate or of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class] shall try an offence punishable under section 13.
CHAPTER IV MANUFACTURE, SALE AND DISTRIBUTION OF 39[DRUGS AND COSMETICS]

16. Standards of quality.— 40[(1) For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression "standard quality" means— (a) in relation to a drug, that the drug complies with the standard set out in 41[the Second Schedule], and (b) in relation to a cosmetic, that the cosmetic complies with such standard as may be prescribed.] (2) The 42[Central Government], after consultation with the Board and after giving by notification in the Official Gazette not less than three months' notice of its intention so to do, may by a like notification add to or otherwise amend 1 [the Second Schedule] for the purposes of this Chapter, and thereupon 1 [ the Second Schedule] shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.
2[17. Misbranded drugs.—For the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be deemed to be misbranded,— (a) if it is so coloured, coated, powdered or polished that damage is concealed or if it is made to appear of better or greater therapeutic value than it really is; or (b) if it is not labelled in the prescribed manner; or (c) if its label or container or anything accompanying the drug bears any statement, design or device which makes any false claim for the drug or which is false or misleading in any particular.]

3[17A. Adulterated drugs.—For the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be adeemed to be adulterated,— (a) if it consists in whole or in part, of any filthy, putrid or decomposed substance; or (b) if it has been prepared, packed or stored under insanitary conditions whereby it may have been contaminated with filth or whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health; or (c) if its container is composed, in whole or in part, of any poisonous or deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to health; or (d) if it bears or contains, for purposes of colouring only, a colour other than one which is prescribed; or (e) if it contains any harmful or toxic substance which may render it injurious to health; or (f) if any substance has been mixed therewith so as to reduce its quality or strength.] 4[17B. Spurious drugs.—For the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be deemed to be spurious,— (a) if it is manufactured under a name which belongs to another drug; or (b) if it is an imitation of, or is a substitute for, another drug or resembles another drug in a manner likely to deceive or bears upon it or upon its label or container the name of another drug unless it is plainly and conspicuously marked so as to reveal its true character and its lack of identity with such other drug; or (c) if the label or container bears the name of an individual or company purporting to be the manufacturer of the drug, which individual or company is fictitious or does not exist; or (d) if it has been substituted wholly or in part by another drug or substance; or (e) if it purports to be the product of a manufacturer of whom it is not truly a product.]

1[17C. Misbranded cosmetics.—For the purposes of this Chapter, a cosmetic shall be deemed to be misbranded,— (a) if it contains a colour which is not prescribed; or (b) if it is not labelled in the prescribed manner; or (c) if the label or container or anything accompanying the cosmetic bears any statement which is false or misleading in any particular.] 1[17D. Spurious cosmetics.—For the purposes of this Chapter, a cosmetic shall be deemed to be spurious,— (a) if it is manufactured under a name which belongs to another cosmetic;
or (b) if it is an imitation of, or a substitute for, another cosmetic or resembles another cosmetic in a manner likely to deceive or bears upon it or upon its label or container the name of another cosmetic unless it is plainly and conspicuously marked so as to reveal its true character and its lack of identity with such other cosmetic; or (c) if the label or container bears the name of an individual or a company purporting to be the manufacturer of the cosmetic which individual or company is fictitious or does not exist; or (d) if it purports to be the product of a manufacturer of whom it is not truly a product.] 2[17E. Adulterated cosmetics.—For the purposes of this Chapter, a cosmetic shall be deemed to be adulterated,— (a) if it consists in whole or in part, of any filthy, putrid or decomposed substance; or (b) if it has been prepared, packed or stored under insanitary conditions whereby it may have been contaminated with filth or whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health; or (c) if its container is composed, in whole or in part, of any poisonous or deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to health; or

(d) if it bears or contains, for purposes of colouring only, a colour other than one which is prescribed; or (e) if it contains any harmful or toxic substance which may render it injurious to health; or (f) if any substance has been mixed therewith so as to reduce its quality or strength.]
18. Prohibition of manufacture and sale of certain drugs and cosmetics.— From such date43 as may be fixed by the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette in this behalf, no person shall himself or by any other person on his behalf— (a) 44[manufacture for sale or for distribution, or sell, or stock or exhibit or offer for sale,] or distribute— 3[(i) any drug which is not of a standard quality, or is misbranded, adulterated or spurious;
4[(ii) any cosmetic which is not of a standard quality, or is misbranded, adulterated or spurious;]] 5[(iii) any patent or proprietary medicine, unless there is displayed in the prescribed manner on the label or container thereof 45[the true formula or list of active ingredients contained in it together with the quantities, thereof];] (iv) any drug which by means of any statement design or device accompanying it or by any other means, purports or claims 46[to prevent, cure or mitigate] any such disease or ailment, or to have any such other effect as may be prescribed;
8[(v) any cosmetic containing any ingredient which may render it unsafe or harmful for use under the directions indicated or recommended;
(vi) any drug or cosmetic in contravention of any of the provisions of this Chapter or any rule made thereunder;]

'/(b) 47[sell, or stock or exhibit or offer for sale,] or distribute any drug 48[or cosmetic] which has been imported or manufactured in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder;
(c) 49[manufacture for sale or for distribution, or sell, or stock or exhibit or offer for sale,] or distribute any drug 2[or cosmetic], except under, and in accordance with the conditions of, a licence issued for such purpose under this Chapter:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the manufacture, subject to prescribed conditions, of small quantities of any drug for the purpose of examination, test or analysis:
Provided further that the 50[Central Government] may, after consultation with the Board, by notification in the Official Gazette, permit, subject to any conditions specified in the notification, the 51[manufacture for sale or for distribution, sale, stocking or exhibiting or offering for sale] or distribution of any drug or class of drugs not being of standard quality.
7[18A. Disclosure of the name of the manufacturer, etc.—Every person, not being the manufacturer of a drug or cosmetic or his agent for the distribution thereof, shall, if so required, disclose to the Inspector the name, address and other particulars of the person from whom he acquired the drug or cosmetic.] 8[18B. Maintenance of records and furnishing of information.—Every person holding a licence under clause (c) of section 18 shall keep and maintain such records, registers and other documents as may be prescribed and shall furnish to any officer or authority exercising any power or discharging any function under this Act such information as is required by such officer or authority for carrying out the purposes of this Act.]
19. Pleas.—(1) Save as hereinafter provided in this section, it shall be no defence in a prosecution under this Chapter to prove merely that the accused was ignorant of the nature, substance or quality of the drug ’[or cosmetic] in respect of which the offence has been committed or of the circumstances of its manufacture or import, or that a purchaser, having bought only for the purpose of test or analysis, has not been prejudiced by the sale.
(2) 2[For the purposes of section 18 a drug shall not be deemed to be misbranded or 3[adulterated or spurious] or to be below standard quality nor

shall a cosmetic be deemed to be misbranded or to be below standard quality] only by reason of the fact that— (a) there has been added thereto some innocuous substance or ingredient because the same is required for the manufacture or preparation of the drug ’[or cosmetic] as an article of commerce in a state fit for carriage or consumption, and not to increase the bulk, weight or measure of the drug ’[or cosmetic] or to conceal its inferior quality or other defects; or (b) in the process of manufacture, preparation or conveyance some extraneous substance has unavoidably become intermixed with it: provided that this clause shall not apply in relation to any sale or distribution of the drug ’[or cosmetic] occurring after the vendor or distributor became aware of such intermixture.
5[(3) A person, not being the manufacturer of a drug or cosmetic or his agent for the distribution thereof, shall not be liable for a contravention of section 18 if he proves— (a) that he acquired the drug or cosmetic from a duly licensed manufacturer, distributor or dealer thereof;
(b) that he did not know and could not, with reasonable diligence, have ascertained that the drug or cosmetic in any way contravened the provisions of that section; and (c) that the drug or cosmetic, while in his possession was properly stored and remained in the same state as when he acquired it.] STATE AMENDMENT West Bengal.—After section 19, insert the following section, namely.— "19A. Burden of proof.—When any drug or cosmetic is seized from any person in the reasonable belief that such drug or cosmetic is misbranded or adulterated, the burden of proving that such drug or cosmetic is not misbranded or adulterated shall be on the person from whose possession such drug or cosmetic was seized." [Vide West Bengal Act 42 of 1973, sec. 5 (w.e.f. 29-4-1974).]

1[20. Government Analysts.—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Government Analysts for such areas in the State and in respect of such drugs or 52[classes of drugs or such cosmetics or classes of cosmetics] as may be specified in the notifications.
(2) The Central Government may also, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Government Analysts in respect of such drugs or 53[classes of drugs or such cosmetics or classes of cosmetics] as may be specified in the notification.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), neither the Central Government nor a State Government shall appoint as a Government Analyst any official not serving under it without the previous consent of the Government under which he is serving.] 3[(4) No person who has any financial interest in the import, manufacture or sale of drugs or cosmetics shall be appointed to be a Government Analyst under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of this section.] 4[21. Inspectors.—(1) The Central Government or a State Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Inspectors for such areas as may be assigned to them by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be.
(2) The powers which may be exercised by an Inspector and the duties which may be performed by him, the drugs or 54[classes of drugs or cosmetics or classes of cosmetics] in relation to which and the conditions, limitations or restrictions subject to which, such powers and duties may be exercised or performed shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) No person who has any financial interest ![in the import, manufacture or sale of drugs or cosmetics] shall be appointed to be an Inspector under this section.
(4) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), and shall be

officially subordinate to such authority 2[, having the prescribed qualifications,] as the Government appointing him may specify in this behalf.] 4[22. Powers of Inspectors.—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 23 and of any rules made by the Central Government in this behalf, an Inspector may, within the local limits of the area for which he is appointed,— 4[(a) inspect,— (i) any premises wherein any drug or cosmetic is being manufactured and the means employed for standardising and testing the drug or cosmetic;
(ii) any premises wherein any drug or cosmetic is being sold, or stocked or exhibited or offered for sale, or distributed;
(b) take samples of any drug or cosmetic,— (i) which is being manufactured or being sold or is stocked or exhibited or offered for sale, or is being distributed;
(ii) from any person who is in the course of conveying, delivering or preparing to deliver such drug or cosmetic to a purchaser or a consignee;
(c) at all reasonable times, with such assistance, if any, as he considers necessary,— (i) search any person, who, he has reason to believe, has secreted about his person, any drug or cosmetic in respect of which an offence under this Chapter has been, or is being, committed; or (ii) enter and search any place in which he has reason to believe that an offence under this Chapter has been, or is being, committed; or (iii) stop and search any vehicle, vessel or other conveyance which, he has reason to believe, is being used for carrying any drug or cosmetic in respect of which an offence under this Chapter has been, or is being, committed, and order in writing the person in possession of the drug or cosmetic in respect of which the offence has been, or is being, committed, not to dispose of any stock of such drug or cosmetic for a specified period not exceeding twenty days, or, unless the alleged offence is such that the defect may be removed by the possessor of the drug or cosmetic, seize the stock of such drug or cosmetic and any substance or article by means of which the offence has been, or is being, committed or which may be employed for the commission of such offence;] 1[(cc) examine any record, register, document or any other material object found 55[with any person, or in any place, vehicle, vessel or other conveyance referred to in clause (c)], and seize the same if he has reason to believe that it may

furnish evidence of the commission of an offence punishable under this Act or the Rules made thereunder;] 3[(cca) require any person to produce any record, register, or other document relating to the manufacture for sale or for distribution, stocking, exhibition for sale, offer for sale or distribution of any drug or cosmetic in respect of which he has reason to believe that an offence under this Chapter has been, or is being, committed;] (d) exercise such other powers as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Chapter or any rules made thereunder.
(2) The provisions of 56[the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)] shall, so far as may be, apply to any search or seizure under this Chapter as they apply to any search or seizure made under the authority of a warrant issued under 57[section 94] of the said Code.
3[(2A) Every record, register or other document seized under clause (cc) or produced under clause (cca) shall be returned to the person, from whom they were seized or who produce the same, within a period of twenty days of the date of such seizure or production, as the case may be, after copies thereof or extracts therefrom certified by that person, in such manner as may be prescribed, have been taken.] (3) If any person wilfully obstructs an Inspector in the exercise of the powers conferred upon him by or under this Chapter 6[or refuses to produce any record, register or other document when so required under clause (cca) of subsection(1),] he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.]
23. Procedure of Inspectors.—(1) Where an Inspector takes any sample of a drug '[or cosmetic] under this Chapter, he shall tender the fair price thereof and may require a written acknowledgement therefor.
(2) Where the price tendered under sub-section (1) is refused or where the Inspector seizes the stock of any drug '[or cosmetic] under clause (c) of section 22, he shall tender a receipt therefor in the prescribed form.
(3) Where an Inspector takes a sample of a drug '[or cosmetic] for the purpose of test or analysis, he shall intimate such purpose in writing in the

prescribed form to the person from whom he takes it and, in the presence of such person unless he wilfully absents himself, shall divide the sample into four portions and effectively seal and suitably mark the same and permit such person to add his own seal and mark to all or any of the portions so sealed and marked:
Provided that where the sample is taken from premises whereon the drug '[or cosmetic] is being manufactured, it shall be necessary to divide the sample into three portions only:
Provided further that where the drug J[or cosmetic] is made up in containers of small volume, instead of dividing a sample as aforesaid, the Inspector may, and if the drug *[or cosmetic] be such that it is likely to deteriorate or be otherwise damaged by exposure shall, take three or four, as the case may be, of the said containers after suitably marking the same and, where necessary, sealing them.
(4) The Inspector shall restore one portion of a sample so divided or one container, as the case may be, to the person from whom he takes it, and shall retain the remainder and dispose of the same as follows:— (i) one portion or container he shall forthwith send to the Government Analyst for test or analysis;
(ii) the second he shall produce to the Court before which proceedings, if any, are instituted in respect of the drug 58[or cosmetic]; and 2[(iii) the third, where taken, he shall send to the person, if any, whose name, address and other particulars have been disclosed under section 18A.] (5) Where an Inspector takes any action under clause (c) of section 22,— (a) he shall use all despatch in ascertaining whether or not the drug '[or cosmetic] contravenes any of the provisions of section 18 and, if it is ascertained that the drug *[or cosmetic] does not so contravene forthwith revoke the order passed under the said clause or, as the case may be, take such action as may be necessary for the return of the stock seized;
(b) if he seizes the stock of the drug ’[or cosmetic], he shall as soon as may be, inform 59[a Judicial Magistrate] and take his orders as to the custody thereof;

(c) without prejudice to the institution of any prosecution, if the alleged contravention be such that the defect may be remedied by the possessor of the drug ’[or cosmetic], he shall, on being satisfied that the defect has been so remedied, forthwith revoke his order under the said clause.
3[(6) Where an Inspector seizes any record, register, document or any other material object under clause (cc) of sub-section (1) of section 22, he shall, as soon as may be, inform 2[a Judicial Magistrate] and take his orders as to the custody thereof.]
24. Persons bound to disclose place where drugs or cosmetics are manufactured or kept.—Every person for the time being in charge of any premises whereon any drug ’[or cosmetic] is being manufactured or is kept for sale or distribution shall, on being required by any Inspector so to do, be legally bound to disclose to the Inspector the place where the drug ’[or cosmetic] is being manufactured or is kept, as the case may be.
25. Reports of Government Analysts.—(1) The Government Analyst to whom a sample of any drug ’[or cosmetic] has been submitted for test or analysis under sub-section (4) of section 23, shall deliver to the Inspector submitting it a signed report in triplicate in the prescribed form.
(2) The Inspector on receipt thereof shall deliver one copy of the report to the person from whom the sample was taken 60[and another copy to the person, if any, whose name, address and other particulars have been disclosed under section 18A], and shall retain the third copy for use in any prosecution in respect of the sample.
(3) Any document purporting to be a report signed by a Government Analyst under this Chapter shall be evidence of the facts stated therein, and such evidence shall be conclusive unless the person from whom the sample was taken 1[or the person whose name, address and other particulars have been disclosed under section 18A] has, within twenty-eight days of the receipt of a copy of the report, notified in writing the Inspector or the Court before which any proceedings in respect of the sample are pending that he intends to adduce evidence in controversion of the report.
(4) Unless the sample has already been tested or analysed in the Central Drugs Laboratory, where a person has under sub-section (3) notified his intention of adducing evidence in controversion of a Government Analyst's

report, the Court may, of its own motion or in its discretion at the request either of the complainant or the accused: cause the sample of the drug ][or cosmetic] produced before the Magistrate under sub-section (4) of section 23 to be sent for test or analysis to the said Laboratory, which shall make the test or analysis and report in writing signed by or under the authority of, the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory the result thereof, and such report shall be conclusive evidence of the facts stated therein.
(5) The cost of a test or analysis made by the Central Drugs Laboratory under sub-section (4) shall be paid by the complainant or accused as the Court shall direct.
26. Purchaser of drug 61[or cosmetic] enabled to obtain test or analysis.— Any person 62[or any recognised consumer association, whether such person is a member of that association or not] shall, on application in the prescribed manner and on payment of the prescribed fee, be entitled to submit for test or analysis to a Government Analyst any drug 2[or cosmetic] 63[purchased by him or it] and to receive a report of such test or analysis signed by the Government Analyst.
5[Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 32, "recognised consumer association" means a voluntary consumer association registered under the Companies Act, 1956 or any other law for the time being in force.] 6[26A. Powers of Central Government to prohibit manufacture, etc., of drug and cosmetic in public interest.—Without prejudice to any other provision contained in this Chapter, if the Central Government is satisfied, that the use of any drug or cosmetic is likely to involve any risk to human beings or animals or that any drug does not have the therapeutic value claimed or purported to be claimed for it or contains ingredients and in such quantity for which there is no therapeutic justification and that in the public interest it is necessary or expedient so to do, then, that Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, ^regulate, restrict or prohibit] the manufacture, sale or distribution of such drug or cosmetic.] 2[26B. Power of Central Government to regulate or restrict, manufacture, etc., of drug in public interest.—Without prejudice to any other provision contained in this Chapter, if the Central Government is satisfied that a

drug is essential to meet the requirements of an emergency arising due to epidemic or natural calamities and that in the public interest, it is necessary or expedient so to do, then, that Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, regulate or restrict the manufacture, sale or distribution of such drug.] 3[27. Penalty for manufacture, sale, etc., of drugs in contravention of this Chapter.—Whoever, himself or by any other person on his behalf, manufactures for sale or for distribution, or sells, or stocks or exhibits or offers for sale or distributes,— (a) any drug deemed to be adulterated under section 17A or spurious under section 4[17B and which] when used by any person for or in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation, or prevention of any disease or disorder is likely to cause his death or is likely to cause such harm on his body as would amount to grievous hurt within the meaning of section 320 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860), solely on account of such drug being adulterated or spurious or not of standard quality, as the case may be, shall be 5[punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees or three times value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more:] 6[Provided that the fine imposed on and released from, the person convicted under this clause shall be paid, by way of compensation, tothe person who had used the adulterated or spurious drugs referred to in this clause:
Provided further that where the use of the adulterated or spurious drugs referred to in this clause has caused the death of a person who used such drugs, the fine imposed on and realised from, the person convicted under this clause, shall be paid to the relative of the person who had died due to the use of the adulterated or spurious drugs referred to in this clause.
Explanation.—For the purposes of the second proviso, the expression "relative" means— (i) spouse of the deceased person; or (ii) a minor legitimate son, and unmarried legitimate daughter and a widowed mother; or (iii) parent of the minor victim; or

(iv) if wholly dependent on the earnings of the deceased person at the time of his death, a son or a daughter who has attained the age of eighteen years;
or (v) any person, if wholly or in part, dependent on the earnings of the deceased person at the time of his death,— (a) the parent; or (b) a minor brother or an unmarried sister; or (c) a widowed daughter-in-law; or (d) a widowed sister; or (e) a minor child of a pre-deceased son; or (f) a minor child of a pre-deceased daughter where no parent of the child is alive; or (g) the paternal grandparent if no parent of the member is alive;] (b) any drug— (i) deemed to be adulterated under section 17A, but not being a drug referred to in clause (a), or (ii) without a valid licence as required under clause (c) of section 18, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall ’[not be less than three years but which may extend to five years and with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more]:
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose a sentence ofimprisonment for a term of 64[less than three years and of fine of less than one lakh rupees];
(c) any drug deemed to be spurious under section 17B, but not being a drug referred to in clause (a) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall 65[not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and with fine which shall not be less than three lakh rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more]:
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special reasons, to be recorded in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of 66[less than seven years but not less than three years and of fine of less than one lakh rupees];
(d) any drug, other than a drug referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (c), in contravention of any other provision of this Chapter or any rule made thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be

less than one year but which may extend to two years 67[and with fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees]:
Provided that the Court may for any adequate and special reasons to be recorded in the judgment impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than one year.
5[27A. Penalty for manufacture, sale, etc., of cosmetics in contravention of this Chapter.—Whoever himself or by any other person on his behalf manufactures for sale or for distribution, or sells, or stocks or exhibits or offers for sale— 1[(i) any cosmetic deemed to be spurious under section 17D or adulterated under section 17E shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees or three times to value of the cosmetics confiscated, whichever is more;
(ii) any cosmetic other than a cosmetic referred to in clause (i) in contravention of any provisions of this Chapter or any rule made thereunder shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with both.] 2[28. Penalty for non-disclosure of the name of the manufacturer, etc.— Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 18A 3[or section 24] shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or 4[with fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees or with both.] 5[28A. Penalty for not keeping documents, etc., and for non-disclosure of information.—Whoever without reasonable cause or excuse, contravenes the provisions of section 18B shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or 6[with fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees or with both].] 7[28B. Penalty for manufacture, etc., of drugs or cosmetics in contravention of section 26A.—Whoever himself or by any other person on his behalf manufactures or sells or distributes any drug or cosmetic in contravention of the provisions of any notification issued under section 26A, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.]

29. Penalty for use of Government Analyst's report for advertising.— Whoever uses any report of a test or analysis made by the Central Drugs Laboratory or by a Government Analyst, or any extract from such report, for the purpose of advertising any drug 8[or cosmetic], shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 9[five thousand rupees].
10[30. Penalty for subsequent offences.—n[(l) Whoever having been convicted of an offence,— (a) under clause (b) of section 27 is again convicted of an offence under that clause, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall ’[not be less than seven years but which may extend to ten years and with fine which shall not be less than two lakh rupees]:
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of 68[less than seven years and of fine of less than one lakh rupees];
(b) under clause (c) of section 27, is again convicted of an offence under that clause shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 3[shall not be less than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and with fine which shall not be less than three lakh rupees];
(c) under clause (d) of section 27, is again convicted of an offence under that clause shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years but which may extend to four years or with fine which shall not be less than 69[fifty thousand rupees], or with both.] 5[(1A) Whoever, having been convicted of an offence under section 27A is again convicted under that section, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to 70[two thousand rupees], or with both.] (2) Whoever, having been convicted of an offence under 71[***] section 29 is again convicted of an offence under the same section, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to 72[two years, or with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees or with both].

STATE AMENDMENTS Uttar Pradesh.—For section 30, substitute the following section, namely.— "30. All offences punishable tinder this chapter shall be cognizable and nonbailable" [Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 47 of 1975, sec. 5 (w.e.f. 15-9-1975).] West Bengal.—In section 30,— (a) in sub-section (1), in clause (a), for the words "ten years", substitute the words "imprisonment for life";
(b) in sub-section (1), in clause (b), for the words "may extent to ten years, or with fine, or with both", substitute the words "shall not be less than two years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine";
(c) in sub-section (1A), for the words "may extend to two years, or with fine which me extend to one thousand rupees, or with both", substitute the words "shall not be less than two years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine".
[Vide West Bengal Act 42 of 1975, sec. 5 (w.e.f. 29-4-1974).] Ed. This State Amendment relates to section 30, prior to its amendments made by the Central Act 26 of 2008, sec. 11 (w.e.f. 10-8-2009) and Central Act 68 of 1982, sec. 25 (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

31. Confiscation.—73[(1)] Where any person has been convicted under this Chapter for contravening any such provision of this Chapter or any rule made thereunder as may be specified by rule made in this behalf, the stock of the drug 2[or cosmetic] in respect of which the contravention has been made shall be liable to confiscation 74[and if such contravention is in respect of— 4[(i) manufacture of any drug deemed to be misbranded under section 17, adulterated under section 17A or spurious under section 17B; or] (ii) 75[manufacture for sale, or for distribution, sale, or stocking or exhibiting or offering for sale,] or distribution of any drug without a valid licence as required under clause (c) of section 18, any implements or machinery used in such manufacture, sale or distribution and any receptacles, packages or coverings in which such drug is contained and the animals, vehicles, vessels or other conveyances used in carrying such drug shall also be liable to confiscation].
6[(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1) where the Court is satisfied, on the application of an Inspector or otherwise and after

such inquiry as may be necessary that the drug or cosmetic is not of standard quality 76[or is a 77[misbranded, adulterated or spurious drug or misbranded or spurious cosmetic,]] such drug or, as the case may be, such cosmetic shall be liable to confiscation.] 9[31A. Application of provisions to Government departments.—The provisions of this Chapter except those contained in section 31 shall apply in relation to the manufacture, sale or distribution of drugs by any department of Government as they apply in relation to the manufacture, sale or distribution of drugs by any other person.]
32. Cognizance of offences.—'[(1) No prosecution under this Chapter shall be instituted except by— (a) an Inspector; or (b) any gazetted officer of the Central Government or a State Government authorised in writing in this behalf by the Central Government or a State Government by a general or special order made in this behalf by that Government; or (c) the person aggrieved; or (d) a recognised consumer association whether such person is a member of that association or not.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no court inferior to that of a Court of Session shall try an offence punishable under this Chapter.] (3) Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be deemed to prevent any person from being prosecuted under any other law for any act or omission which constitutes an offence against this Chapter.
STATE AMENDMENT West Bengal.—For section 32, substitute the following section, namely:— "32. Cognizance of offences and arrest without warrant.—(1) All offences punishable under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
(2) Any police officer not below the rank of a sub-inspector of Police may arrest without warrant any person against whom a reasonable complaint has been made or Creditable information has been received of his having been concerned in any of the offences punishable under this Act."

[Vide West Bengal Act 42 of 1973, sec. 5 (w.e.f. 29-4-1974).] 2[32A. Power of Court to implead the manufacturer, etc.—Where, at any time during the trial of any offence under this Chapter alleged to have been committed by any person, not being the manufacturer of a drug or cosmetic or his agent for the distribution thereof the Court is satisfied, on the evidence adduced before it, that such manufacturer or agent is also concerned in that offence, then, the Court may, notwithstanding anything contained 3[in subsections (1), (2) and (3) of section 319 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)], proceed against him as though a prosecution had been instituted against him under section 32.] 1[32B. Compounding of certain offences.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), any offence punishable under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 13, section 28 and section 28A of this Act (whether committed by a company or any officer thereof), not being an offence punishable with imprisonment only, or with imprisonment and also with fine, may, either before or after the institution of any prosecution, be compounded by the Central Government or by any State Government or any officer authorised in this behalf by the Central Government or a State Government, on payment for credit to that Government of such sum as that Government may, by rules made in this behalf, specify:
Provided that such sum shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum amount of the fine which may be imposed under this Act for the offence so compounded:
Provided further that in cases of subsequent offences, the same shall not be compoundable.
(2) When the accused has been committed for trial or when he has been convicted and an appeal is pending, no composition for the offence shall be allowed without the leave of the court to which he is committed or, as the case may be, before which the appeal is to be heard.
(3) Where an offence is compounded under sub-section (1), no proceeding or further proceeding, as the case may be, shall be taken against the offender in respect of the offence so compounded and the offender, if in custody, shall be released forthwith.]

33. Power of Central Government to make rules.—78[(1) The Central Government may 79[after consultation with, or on the recommendation of, the Board] and after previous publication by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of this Chapter:
Provided that consultation with the Board may be dispensed with if the Central Government is of opinion that circumstances have arisen which render it necessary to make rules without such consultation, but in such a case the Board shall be consulted within six months of the making of the rules and the Central Government shall take into consideration any suggestions which the Board may make in relation to the amendment of the said rules.] (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may— (a) provide for the establishment of laboratories for testing and analysing drugs 80[or cosmetics];
(b) prescribe the qualifications and duties of Government Analysts and the qualifications of Inspectors;
(c) prescribe the methods of test or analysis to be employed in determining whether a drug 4[or cosmetic] is of standard quality;
(d) prescribe, in respect of biological and organometallic compounds, the units or methods of standardisation;
:[(dd) prescribe under clause (d) of 81[section 17A] the colour or colours which a drug may bear or contain for purposes of colouring;] 3[(dda) prescribe under clause (d) of section 17E the colour or colours which a cosmetic may bear or contain for the purposes of colouring;] (e) prescribe the forms of licences 82[for the manufacture for sale or for distribution], for the sale and for the distribution of drugs or any specified drug or class of drugs 83[or of cosmetics or any specified cosmetic or class of cosmetics], the form of application for such licences, the conditions subject to which such licences may be issued, the authority empowered to issue the same 84[the qualifications of such authority] and the fees payable therefor; 6[and provide for the cancellation or suspension of such licences in any case where

any provision of this Chapter or the rules made thereunder is contravened or any of the conditions subject to which they are issued is not complied with];
6[(ee) prescribe the records, registers or other documents to be kept and maintained under section 18B;] 6[(eea) prescribe the fees for the inspection (for the purposes of grant or renewal of licences) of premises, wherein any drug or cosmetic is being or is proposed to be manufactured;] 6[(eeb) prescribe the manner in which copies are to be certified under subsection (2A) of section 22;] (f) specify the diseases or ailments which a drug may not purport or claim 85[to prevent, cure or mitigate] and such other effects which a drug may not purport or claim to have;
(g) prescribe the conditions subject to which small quantities of drugs may be manufactured for the purpose of examination, test or analysis;
(h) require the date of manufacture and the date of expiry of potency to be clearly and truly stated on the label or container of any specified drug or class of drugs, and prohibit the sale, stocking or exhibition for sale, or distribution of the said drug or class of drugs after the expiry of a specified period from the date of manufacture or after the expiry of the date of potency;
(i) prescribe the conditions to be observed in the packing in bottles, packages, and other containers of drugs 5[or cosmetics], 6[including the use of packing material which comes into direct contact with the drugs] and prohibit the sale, stocking or exhibition for sale, or distribution of drugs '[or cosmetics] packed in contravention of such conditions;
(j) regulate the mode of labelling packed drugs ’[or cosmetics], and prescribe the matters which shall or shall not be included in such labels;
(k) prescribe the maximum proportion of any poisonous substance which may be added to or contained in any drug, prohibit the manufacture, sale or stocking or exhibition for sale, or distribution of any drug in which that proportion is exceeded, and specify substances which shall be deemed to be poisonous for the purposes of this Chapter and the rules made thereunder;

(1) require that the accepted scientific name of any specified drug shall be displayed in the prescribed manner on the label or wrapper of any patent or proprietary medicine containing such drug;
3[(n) prescribe the powers and duties of Inspectors 86[and the qualifications of the authority to which such Inspectors shall be subordinate] and 5[specify the drugs or classes of drugs or cosmetics or classes of cosmetics] in relation to which and the conditions, limitations or restrictions subject to which, such powers and duties may be exercised or performed;] (o) prescribe the forms of report to be given by Government Analysts, and the manner of application for test or analysis under section 26 and the fees payable therefor;
6[(p) specify the offences against this Chapter or any rule made thereunder in relation to which an order of confiscation may be made under section 31;
87[***]] (q) provide for the exemption, conditionally or otherwise, from all or any of the provisions of this Chapter or the rules made thereunder, of any specified drug or class of drugs J[or cosmetic or class of cosmetics]; 8[and] 9[(r) sum which may be specified by the Central Government under section 32B.] STATE AMENDMENT Maharashtra.—In section 33,— (1) in sub-section (2),— (a) in clause (e), omit the words "and the fees payable";
(b) omit clause (ee);
(c) in clause (o), omit the words "and the fees payable therefor" [Vide Maharashtra Act 31 of 1989, sec. 2 (w.e.f. 4-10-1989.] (2) after section 33, insert the following section, namely:— "33A. Power of State Government to make rules.—The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette and subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules to prescribe the fees payable for the following purposes of this chapter, namely:—

(a) grant or renewal of a license for the manufacture for sale or distribution for the sale and for the distribution of drugs or any specified drugs or class of drug or of cosmetics or any specified cosmetics or class of cosmetics;
(b) inspection (for the purposes of grant or renewal of licenses) or premises, wherein any drug or cosmetic is being or is proposed to be manufactured;
(c) test or analysis of any drug or cosmetic by Government Analyst; and (d) any other matter for which fees may be prescribed under this Chapter." [Vide Maharashtra Act 31 of 1989, sec. 3 (w.e.f. 4-10-1989).]

1[33A. Chapter not to apply to 88[Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drugs.— Save as otherwise provided in this Act, nothing contained in this Chapter shall apply to 2[Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drugs.] 3[CHAPTER IVA PROVISIONS RELATING TO 2[AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA AND UNANI] DRUGS

33B. Application of Chapter IVA.—This Chapter shall apply only to 2[Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani] drugs.
33C. Ayurvedic and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board.—(1) TheCentral Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette and with effect from such date as may be specified therein, constitute a Board (to be called the 4[Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board]) to advise the Central Government and the State Governments on technical matters arising out of this Chapter and to carry out the other functions assigned to it by this Chapter.
(2) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely,— (i) the Director General of Health Services, ex officio;
(ii) the Drugs Controller, India, ex officio;
![(iii) the principal officer dealing with Indian systems of medicine in the Ministry of Health, ex officio;] (iv) the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory, Calcutta, ex officio;
(v) one person holding the appointment of Government Analyst under section 33F, to be nominated by the Central Government;
(vi) one Pharmacognocist to be nominated by the Central Government;
(vii) one Phyto-chemist to be nominated by the Central Government;

2[(viii) four persons to be nominated by the Central Government, two from amongst the members of the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee, one from amongst the members of Unani Pharmacopoeia Committee and one from amongst the members of the Siddha Pharmacopoeia Committee;] (ix) one teacher in Darvyaguna and Bhaishajya Kalpana, to be nominated by the Central Government;
(x) one teacher in Ilm-ul-Advia and Taklis-Wa-Dawa-Sazi, to be nominated by the Central Government;
3[(xi) one teacher in Gunapadam to be nominated by the Central Government;
(xii) three persons, one each to represent the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drug industry, to be nominated by the Central Government;
(xiii) three persons, one each from amongst the practitioners of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Tibb systems of medicine to be nominated by the Central Government.] (3) The Central Government shall appoint a member of the Board as its Chairman.
(4) The nominated members of the Board shall hold office for three years but shall be eligible for renomination.
(5) The Board may, subject to the previous approval of the Central Government, make bye-laws fixing quorum and regulating its own procedure and conduct of all business to be transacted by it.
(6) The functions of the Board may be exercised notwithstanding any vacancy therein.
(7) The Central Government shall appoint a person to be Secretary of the Board and shall provide the Board with such clerical and other staff as the Central Government considers necessary.
![33D. The Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative Committee.—(1) The Central Government may constitute an Advisory Committee to be called the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative Committee to advise the Central Government, the State Governments and the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board on any matter for the purpose of securing uniformity throughout India in the administration of this Act in so far as it relates to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs.

(2) The Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative Committee shall consist of two persons to be nominated by the Central Government as representatives of that Government and not more than one representative of each State to be nominated by the State Government concerned.
(3) The Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative Committee shall meet when required to do so by the Central Government and shall regulate its own procedure.] 1[33E. Misbranded drugs.—For the purposes of this Chapter, an Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug shall be deemed to be misbranded— (a) if it is so coloured, coated, powdered or polished that damage is concealed, or if it is made to appear of better or greater therapeutic value than it really is; or (b) if it is not labelled in the prescribed manner; or (c) if its label or container or anything accompanying the drug bears any statement, design or device which makes any false claim for the drug or which is false or misleading in any particular.] 1[33EE. Adulterated drugs.—For the purposes of this Chapter, an Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug shall be deemed to be adulterated,— (a) if it consists, in whole or in part, of any filthy, putrid or decomposed substance; or (b) if it has been prepared, packed or stored under insanitary conditions whereby it may have been contaminated with filth or whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health; or (c) if its container is composed, in whole or in part, of any poisonous or deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to health; or (d) if it bears or contains, for purposes of colouring only, a colour other than one which is prescribed; or (e) if it contains any harmful or toxic substance which may render it injurious to health; or

(f) if any substance has been mixed therewith so as to reduce its quality or strength.
Explanation.—For the purpose of clause (a), a drug shall not be deemed to consist, in whole or in part, of any decomposed substance only by reason of the fact that such decomposed substance is the result of any natural decomposition of the drug:
Provided that such decomposition is not due to any negligence on the part of the manufacturer of the drug or the dealer thereof and that it does not render the drug injurious to health.] 1[33EEA. Spurious drugs.—For the purposes of this Chapter, an Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug shall be deemed to be spurious— (a) if it is sold, or offered or exhibited for sale, under a name which belongs to another drug; or (b) if it is an imitation of, or is a substitute for, another drug or resembles another drug in a manner likely to deceive, or bears upon it or upon its label or container the name of another drug, unless it is plainly and conspicuously marked so as to reveal its true character and its lack of identity with such other drug; or (c) if the label or container bears the name of an individual or company purporting to be the manufacturer of the drug, which individual or company is fictitious or does not exist; or (d) if it has been substituted wholly or in part by any other drug or substance;
or (e) if it purports to be the product of a manufacturer of whom it is not truly a product.] 1[33EEB. Regulation of manufacture for sale of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs.—No person shall manufacture for sale or for distribution any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug except in accordance with such standards, if any, as may be prescribed in relation to that drug.] H33EEC. Prohibition of manufacture and sale of certain Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs.—From such date as the State Government may, by

notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, no person, either by himself or by any other person on his behalf, shall— (a) manufacture for sale or for distribution— (i) any misbranded, adulterated or spurious Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug;
(ii) any patent or proprietary medicine, unless there is displayed in the prescribed manner on the label or container thereof the true list of all the ingredients contained in it; and (iii) any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug in contravention of any of the provisions of this Chapter or any rule made thereunder;
(b) sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale or distribute any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug which has been manufactured in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act, or any rule made thereunder;
(c) manufacture for sale or for distribution, any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug, except under, and in accordance with the conditions of, a licence issued for such purpose under this Chapter by the prescribed authority:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to Vaidyas and Hakims who manufacture Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug for the use of their own patients:
Provided further that nothing in this section shall apply to the manufacture, subject to the prescribed conditions, of small quantities of any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug for the purpose of examination, test or analysis.] 1[33EED. Power of Central Government to prohibit manufacture, etc., of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs in public interest.—Without prejudice to any other provision contained in this Chapter, if the Central Government is satisfied on the basis of any evidence or other material available before it that the use of any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug is likely to involve any risk to human beings or animals or that any such drug does not have the therapeutic value claimed or purported to be claimed for it and that in the public interest it is necessary or expedient so to do then, that Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, prohibit the manufacture, sale or distribution of such drug.] 33F. Government Analysts.—(1) The Central Government or a State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such persons

as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Government Analysts for such areas as may be assigned to them by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), neither the Central Government nor a State Government shall appoint as a Government Analyst any official not serving under it without the previous consent of the Government under which he is serving.
2[(3) No person who has any financial interest in the manufacture or sale of any drug shall be appointed to be a Government Analyst under this section.] 33G. Inspectors.—(1) The Central Government or a State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Inspectors for such areas as may be assigned to them by the Central Government or the State Government as the case may be.
(2) The powers which may be exercised by an Inspector and the duties which may be performed by him and the conditions, limitations or restrictions subject to which such powers and duties may be exercised or performed shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) No person who has any financial interest in the manufacture or sale of any drug shall be appointed to be an Inspector under this section.
(4) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and shall be officially subordinate to such authority as the Government appointing him may specify in this behalf.
33H. Application of provisions of sections 22, 23, 24 and 25.—The provisions of sections 22, 23, 24 and 25 and the rules, if any, made thereunder shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to an Inspector and a Government Analyst appointed under this Chapter as they apply in relation to an Inspector and a Government Analyst appointed under Chapter IV, subject to the modification that the references to "drug" in the said sections, shall be construed as references to 89 [Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drug.

2[33-I. Penalty for manufacture, sale, etc., of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug in contravention of this Chapter.—Whoever himself or by any other person on his behalf— (1) manufactures for sale or for distribution— 3[(a) any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug— (i) deemed to be misbranded under section 33E, (ii) deemed to be adulterated under section 33EE, or (iii) without a valid licence or in violation of any of the conditions thereof, as required under section 33EEC, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and with fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more;] (b) any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug deemed to be spurious under section 33EEA, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than [fifty thousand rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more]:
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than one year and of fine of less than 90[fifty thousand rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more]; or 5[(c) any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug in contravention of the provisions of any notification issued under section 33EED shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more.] (2) contravenes any other provisions of this Chapter or of section 24 as applied by section 33H or any rule made under this Chapter, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ’[six months and with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees].

2[33J. Penalty for subsequent offences.—Whoever having been convicted of an offence,— (a) under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 33-1 is again convicted of an offence under that clause, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and with fine which shall not be less than 91[fifty thousand rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more];
(b) under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 33-1 is again convicted of an offence under that clause, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years but which may extend to six years and with fine which shall not be less than 92[one lakh rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more]:
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than two years and of fine of less than 4[one lakh rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more];
(c) under sub-section (2) of section 33-1 is again convicted of an offence under that sub-section, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 93[one year and with fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more].
33K. Confiscation.—Where any person has been convicted under this Chapter, the stock of the 94[Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drug, in respect of which the contravention has been made, shall be liable to confiscation.
3[33KA. Disclosure of name of manufacturer, etc.—Every person, not being the manufacturer of any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug or his agent for the distribution thereof, shall, if so required, disclose to the Inspector the name, address and other particulars of the person from whom he acquired the Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug.] 7[33KB. Maintenance of records and furnishing of information.—Every person holding a licence under clause (c) of section 33EEC shall keep and maintain such records, registers and other documents as may be prescribed and shall furnish to any officer or authority exercising any power or discharging any

function under this Act such information as is required by such officer or authority for carrying out the purposes of this Act.] 33L. Application of provisions to Government departments.—The provisions of this Chapter except those contained in section 33K shall apply in relation to the manufacture for sale, sale or distribution of any 95 [Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drug by any department of Government as they apply in relation to the manufacture for sale, sale, or distribution of such drug by any other person.
33M. Cognizance of offences.—(1) No prosecution under this Chapter shall be instituted except by an Inspector 96[with the previous sanction of the authority specified under sub-section (4) of section 33G].
(2) No Court inferior to that 97[of a Metropolitan Magistrate or of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class] shall try an offence punishable under this Chapter.
33N. Power of Central Government to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may, 98[after consultation with, or on the recommendation of, the Board] and after previous publication by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Chapter:
Provided that consultation with the Board may be dispensed with if the Central Government is of opinion that circumstances have arisen which render it necessary to make rules without such consultation, but in such a case, the Board shall be consulted within six months of the making of the rules and the Central Government shall take into consideration any suggestions which the Board may make in relation to the amendment of the said rules.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may— (a) provide for the establishment of laboratories for testing and analysing ’[Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drugs;
(b) prescribe the qualifications and duties of Government Analysts and the qualifications of Inspectors;
(c) prescribe the methods of test or analysis to be employed in determining whether any ’[Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drug is labelled with the true list of the ingredients which it is purported to contain;

(d) specify any substance as a poisonous substance;
(e) prescribe the forms of licences for the manufacture for sale of ’[Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drugs, 99[and for sale of processed Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs,] the form of application for such licences, the conditions subject to which such licences may be issued, the authority empowered to issue the same and the fees payable therefor; J[and provide for the cancellation or suspension of such licences in any case where any provision of this Chapter or rules made thereunder is contravened or any of the conditions subject to which they are issued is not complied with];
2[(f) prescribe the conditions to be observed in the packing of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs including the use of packing material which comes into direct contact with the drugs, regulate the mode of labelling packed drugs and prescribe the matters which shall or shall not be included in such labels;] (g) prescribe the conditions subject to which small quantities of 1 [Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani] drugs may be manufactured for the purpose of examination, test or analysis; and 1[(gg) prescribe under clause (d) of section 33EE the colour or colours which an Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug may bear or contain for purposes of colouring;] 1 [ (gga) prescribe the standards for Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs under section 33EEB 100[***];] 4[(ggb) prescribe the records, registers or other documents to be kept and maintained under section 33KB; and] (h) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed under this Chapter.
STATE AMENDMENT Maharashtra.—In section 33N,— (1) in sub-section (2), in clause (e), omit the words "and the fees payable therefore";
(2) after section 33N, insert the following section, namely:—

"33N-1. Power of State government to make roles.—The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette and subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules to prescribe the fees payable for the following purposes of this chapter, namely.— (a) grant or renewal of a license for the manufacture for sale of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs, and for sale of processed Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs;
(b) inspection (for the purpose of grant or removal of licenses) of premises, wherein any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug is being or is proposed to be manufactured;
(c) test or analysis of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug by Government Analyst; and (d) any other matter for which fees may be prescribed under this chapter." [Vide Maharashtra Act 31 of 1989, sec. 4 (w.e.f. 4-10-1989).] 33-0. Power to amend First Schedule.—The Central Government, after consultation with the Board and after giving, by notification in the Official Gazette, not less than three months' notice of its intention so to do, may, by a like notification, add to or otherwise amend the First Schedule for the purposes of this Chapter and thereupon the said Schedule shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.]
CHAPTER V MISCELLANEOUS 2[101[33P.] Power to give directions.—The Central Government may give such directions to any State Government as may appear to the Central Government to be necessary for carrying into execution in the State any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder.]
34. Offences by companies.—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section— (a) "company" means a body corporate, and includes a firm or other association of individuals; and (b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.
4[34A. Offences by Government departments.—Where an offence under Chapter IV or Chapter IVA has been committed by any department of Government, such authority as is specified by the Central Government to be in charge of manufacture, sale or distribution of drugs or where no authority is specified, the head of the department, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render any such authority or person liable to any punishment provided in Chapter IV or Chapter IVA, as the case may be, if such authority or person proves that the offence was committed without its or his knowledge or that such authority or person exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.] 1[34AA. Penalty for vexatious search or seizure.—Any Inspector exercising powers under this Act or the rules made thereunder, who,— (a) without reasonable ground of suspicion searches any place, vehicle, vessel or other conveyance; or (b) vexatiously and unnecessarily searches any person; or

(c) vexatiously and unnecessarily seizes any drug or cosmetic, or any substance or article, or any record, register, document or other material object;
or (d) commits, as such Inspector, any other act, to the injury of any person without having reason to believe that such act is required for the execution of his duty, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.]
35. Publication of sentences passed under this Act.—(1) If any person is convicted of an offence under this Act, 102[the Court before which the conviction takes place shall, on application made to it by the Inspector, cause] the offender's name, place of residence, the offence of which he has been convicted and the penalty which has been inflicted upon him, to be published at the expense of such person in such newspapers or in such other manner as the Court may direct.
(2) The expenses of such publication shall be deemed to form part of the costs relating to the conviction and shall be recoverable in the same manner as those costs are recoverable.
36.
Magistrate's power to impose enhanced penalties.— Notwithstanding anything contained in 103[***] 104[the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)], it shall be lawful for 105[any Metropolitan Magistrate or any Judicial Magistrate of the first class] to pass any sentence authorized by this Act in excess of his powers under 3[***] the said Code.
1[36A. Certain offences to be tried summarily.—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), 106[all offences (except the offences triable by the Special Court under section 36AB or Court of Session) under this Act], punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years, other than an offence under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 33-I, shall be tried in a summary way by a Judicial Magistrate of the first class specially empowered in this behalf by the State Government or by a Metropolitan Magistrate and the provisions of sections 262 to 265 (both inclusive) of the said Code shall, as far as may be, apply to such trial:
Provided that, in the case of any conviction in a summary trial under this section, it shall be lawful for the Magistrate to pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year:

Provided further that when at the commencement of, or in the course of, a summary trial under this section it appears to the Magistrate that the nature of the case is such that a sentence of imprisonment for a term exceeding one year may have to be passed or that it is, for any other reason, undesirable to try the case summarily, the Magistrate shall, after hearing the parties, record an order to that effect and thereafter recall any witness who has been examined and proceed to hear or rehear the case in the manner provided by the said Code.] 3[36AB. Special Courts.—(1) The Central Government, or the State Government, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court, shall, for trial of offences relating to adulterated drugs or spurious drugs and punishable under clauses (a) and (b) of section 13, sub-section (3) of section 22, clauses (a) and (c) of section 27, section 28, section 28A, section 28B and clause (b) of subsection (1) of section 30 and other offences relating to adulterated drugs or spurious drugs, by notification, designate one or more Courts of Session as a Special Court or Special Courts for such area or areas or for such case or class or group of cases as may be specified in the notification.
Explanation.—In this sub-section, "High Court" means the High Court of the State in which a Court of Session designated as Special Court was functioning immediately before such designation.
(2) While trying an offence under this Act, a Special Court shall also try an offence, other than an offence referred to in sub-section (1), with which the accused may, under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), be charged at the same trial.] 3[36AC. Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable in certain cases.— (1)Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),— (a) every offence, relating to adulterated or spurious drug and punishable under clauses (a) and (c) of sub-section (1) of section 13, clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 13, sub-section (3) of section 22, clauses (a) and (c) of section 27, section 28, section 28A, section 28B and sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 30 and other offences relating to adulterated drugs or spurious drugs, shall be cognizable.
(b) no person accused, of an offence punishable under clauses (a) and

(c) of sub-section (1) of section 13, clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 13, sub-section (3) of section 22, clauses (a) and (c) of section27, section 28, section 28A, section 28B and sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 30 and other offences relating to adulterated drugs or spurious drugs, shall be released on bail or on his own bond unless— (i) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the application for such release; and (ii) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the Court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail:
Provided that a person, who, is under the age of sixteen years, or is a woman or is sick or infirm, may be released on bail, if the Special Court so directs.
(2) The limitation on granting of bail specified in clause (b) of sub-section (1) is in addition to the limitations under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or any other law for the time being in force on granting of bail.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the special powers of the High Court regarding bail under section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) and the High Court may exercise such powers including the power under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of that section as if the reference to "Magistrate" in that section includes also a reference to a "Special Court" designated under section 36AB.] 1[36AD. Application of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to proceedings before Special Court.—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) (including the provisions as to bails or bonds), shall apply to the proceedings before a Special Court and for the purposes of the said provisions, the Special Court shall be deemed to be a Court of Session and the person conducting the prosecution before the Special Court, shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor:
Provided that the Central Government or the State Government may also appoint, for any case or class or group of cases, a Special Public Prosecutor.

(2) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed as a Public Prosecutor or a Special Public Prosecutor under this section unless he has been in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years, under the Union or a State, requiring special knowledge of law.
(3) Every person appointed as a Public Prosecutor or a Special Public Prosecutor under this section shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within the meaning of clause (u) of section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) and the provisions of that Code shall have effect accordingly.] 1[36AE. Appeal and revision.—The High Court may exercise, so far as may be applicable, all the powers conferred by Chapter XXIX or Chapter XXX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), on a High Court, as if a Special Court within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court were a Court of Session trying cases within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court.]
37. Protection of action taken in good faith.—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.] 2[38. Rules to be laid before Parliament.—Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 107[and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.] STATE AMENDMENT Maharashtra.—(1) In section 38, for the words "Every rule made", substitute the words "Every rule made by the Central Government".
(2) After section 38, insert the following section, namely.—

"39. Rules to be laid before State Legislature.—Every rule made by State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions afore said, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, and notify such decision in the Official Gazette, the rule shall from the date of publication of such notification have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done or omitted to be done under that rule." [Vide Maharashtra Act 31 of 1989, sec. 7 (w.e.f. 4-10-1989).] '[THE FIRST SCHEDULE [See section 3(a)] 2[A.—AYURVEDIC AND SIDDHA SYSTEMS]

Serial No.
Name of book Ayurveda
1.
Arogya Kalpadruma
2.
Arka Prakasha
3.
Arya Bhishak
4.
Ashtanga Hridaya
5.
Ashtanga Samgraha
6.
Ayurveda Kalpadruma
7.
Ayurveda Prakasha
8.
Ayurveda Samgraha
9.
Bhaishajya Ratnavali
10.
Bharat Bhaishajya Ratnakara
11.
Bhava Prakasha
12.
Brihat Nighantu Ratnakara
13.
Charaka Samhita

14.
Chakra Datta
15.
Gada Nigraha
16.
Kupi Pakva Rasayana
17.
Nighantu Ratnakara
18.
Rasa Chandanshu
19.
Rasa Raja Sundara
20.
Rasaratna Samuchaya
21.
3[Rasatantra Sara Va Siddha Prayoga Samgraha - Part I] 4[21(a).
Rastantra Sara Va Siddha Prayog Samgraha - Part II (Edition
2006).]
22.
Rasa Tarangini
23.
Rasa Yoga Sagara
24.
Rasa Yoga Ratnakara
25.
Rasa Yoga Samgraha
26.
Rasendra Sara Samgraha
27.
Rasa Pradipika
28.
Sahasrayoga
29.
Sarvaroga Chikitsa Ratnam
30.
Sarvayoga Chikitsa Ratnam
31.
Sharangadhara Samhita
32.
Siddha Bhaishajya Manimala
33.
Siddha Yoga Samgraha
34.
Sushruta Samhita
35.
Vaidya Chintamani
36.
Vaidyaka Shabda Sindu
37.
Vaidyaka Chikitsa Sara
38.
Vaidya Jiwan
39.
Basava Rajeeyam
40.
Yoga Ratnakara
41.
Yoga Tarangini
42.
Yoga Chintamani

43.
Kashyapasamhita
44.
Bhelasamhita
45.
Vishwanathachikitsa
46.
Vrindachikitsa
47.
Ayurvedachintamani
48.
Abhinavachintamani
49.
Ayurveda-ratnakar
50.
Yogara tnasangraha 51, Rasamrita
52.
Dravyagunanighantu
53.
Rasamanijari
54.
Bangasena 1[54A.
2[Ayurvedic Formulary of India and its Parts] 1[54B.
Ayurveda Sara Sangraha] 3[54C.
Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India] 4[54D.
Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India and its Parts]]

Siddha
55.
Siddha Vaidya Thirattu
56.
Therayar Maha Karisal
57.
Brahma Muni Karukkadai (300)
58.
Bhogar (700)
59.
Pulippani (500)
60.
Agasthiyar Paripuranam (400)
61.
Therayar Yamagam
62.
Agasthiyar Chenduram (300)
63.
Agasthiyar (1500)
64.
Athmarakshamrutham
65.
Agasthiyar Pin (80)
66.
Agasthiyar Rathna Churukkam
67.
Therayar Karisal (300)
68.
Veeramamuni Nasa Kandam

69.
Agasthiyar (600)
70.
Agasthiyar Kanma Soothiram
71.
18 Siddhar's Chillarai Kovai
72.
Yogi Vatha Kaviyam
73.
Therayar Tharu
74.
Agasthiyar Vaidya Kaviyam (1500)
75.
Bala Vagadam
76.
Chimittu Rathna (Rathna) Churukkam
77.
Nagamuni (200)
78.
Agasthiyar Chillarai Kovai
79.
Chikicha Rathna Deepam
80.
Agasthiyar Nayana Vidhi
81.
Yugi Karisal (151)
82.
Agasthiyar Vallathi (600)
83.
Therayar Thaila Varkam 1[84.
Siddha Formulary of Unani Medicine (Part I)] 2 [85.
Sidha Pharmacopoeia of India and its Parts] 3[B.—UNANI TIBB SYSTEM]
1.
Karabadin Qadri
2.
Karabadin Kabir
3.
Karabadin Azam
4.
Ilaj-ul-Amraz
5.
A1 Karabadin
6.
Biaz Kabir Vol. II
7.
Karabadin Jadid
8.
Kitalf-ul-Taklis
9.
Sanat-ul-Taklis
10.
Mifta-ul-Khazain
11.
Madan-ul-Aksir
12.
Makhzan-ul-Murabbat M13.
National Formulary of Unani Medicine 4[***][

5[14.
Unani Pharmacopoeia of India]]

6[THE SECOND SCHEDULE (See sections 8 and 16) STANDARDS TO BE COMPLIED WITH BY IMPORTED DRUGS AND BY DRUGS MANUFACTURED FOR SALE, STOCKED OR
EXHIBITED FOR SALE OR DISTRIBUTED

Class of drug Standard to be complied with
1. Patent or proprietary medicines 7[other than Homoeopathic medicines].
8[2. Substances commonly known as vaccines, sera, toxine, toxoids, antitoxins, and antigens and biological products of like nature for human use or for veterinary use.
The formula or list of ingredients displayed in the prescribed manner on the label or container and such other standards as may be prescribed. The standards maintained at the International Laboratory for Biological Standards, Stantans Seruminstitute, Copenhagen, and at the Central Veterinary Laboratory, Weybridge Surrey, UK and such other laboratories recognised by the World Health Organisation from time to time, such further standards of strength, quality and purity, as may be prescribed.]

Class of drug
4.
Substances (other than food) intended to affect the structure or any function of the human body or intended to be used for the destruction of vermin or insects which cause disease in human beings or animals.
2[4A. Homoeopathic Medicines— (a) Drugs included in the Standard to be complied with Such standards as may be prescribed.
Standards of identity, purity and strength specified in the edition of the Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia of India for the time being and such other standards as may be prescribed.
Standards of identity, purity and strength prescribed for the Drugs in the edition of such Pharmacopoeia for the time being in which they are given and

Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia of India.
(b) Drugs not included in the Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia of India but which are included in the Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia of United States of America or the United Kingdom or the German Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia.
(c) Drugs not included in the Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia of India or the United States of America, or the United Kingdom or the German Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia.
3[5. Other drugs— (a) Drugs included in the Indian Pharmacopoeia.
(b) Drugs not included in the Indian Pharmacopoeia but which are included in the official Pharmacopoeia of any other country.
such other standards as may be prescribed.
The formula or list of ingredients displayed in the prescribed manner on the label of the container and such other standards as may be prescribed by the Central Government.] Standards of identity, purity and strength specified in the edition of the Indian Pharmacopoeia for the time being in force and such other standards as may be prescribed.
In case the standards of identity, purity and strength for drugs are not specified in the edition of the Indian Pharmacopoeia for the time being in force but are specified in the edition of the Indian Pharmacopoeia immediately preceding the standards of identity, purity and strength shall be those occurring in such immediately preceding edition of the Indian Pharmacopoeia and such other standards as may be prescribed.
Standards of identity, purity and strength specified for drugs in the edition of such official Pharmacopoeia of any other country for the time being in force and such other standards as may be prescribed. In case the standards of identity, purity and strength for drugs are not specified in the edition of such official Pharmacopoeia for the time being in force, but are specified in the edition immediately preceding the standards of

identity, purity and strength shall be those occurring in such immediately preceding edition of such official Pharmacopoeia and such other standards as may be prescribed.]]

REFERENCES

1 For Statement of Objects and Reasons, see Gazette of India, 1940, Pt. V, p. 34; for the Report of the Select Committee, see Gazette of India, 1940, Pt. V. p. 143.The Act has been applied to all the partially excluded areas in the State of Orissa, see Orissa Government Notification No. 3358-LSG, dated 25th August, 1941.

2 Ins. by Act 21 of 1962, sec. 2 (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).

3 Subs, by the A.O. 1950, for certain words.

4 Ins. by Act 21 of 1962, sec. 3 (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).

5 The words "except the State of Jammu and Kashmir" omitted by Act 19 of 1972, sec. 2 (w.e.f. 315-1972).

6 24th August, 1974, vide Notification No. S.O. 2185, dated 9th August, 1974, published in the Gazette of India, 1974, Pt. II, Sec. 3(ii), p. 2331.

7 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 2, for "Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

8 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 3, for "disease in human beings, mentioned in, and processed and manufactured" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

9 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 3, for "Ayurvedic (including Siddha) and Unani (Tibb) system of medicine" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

10 The words ", but does not include soap" omitted by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 3 (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
11 Subs, by Act 13 of 1964, sec. 2, for "vermins" (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).

12 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 2, for "Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

13 Clause (d) omitted by Act 19 of 1972, sec. 3 (w.e.f. 31-5-1972).

14 Ins. by Act 21 of 1962, sec. 4 (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).

15 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 3, for "sale and distribution" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983)

16 Subs, by Act 3 of 1951, sec. 3 and Sch., for "the States".

17 Subs, by Act 13 of 1964, sec. 4, for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).

18 Subs, by Act 13 of 1964, sec. 5, for "under Chapter IV" (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).

19Ins. by Act 3 of 1951, sec. 3 and Sch., for "the States" (w.e.f. 1-4-1951).

20 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 2, for "Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

21 Subs, by Act 21 of 1962, sec. 6, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).

22 Subs, by Act 13 of 1964, sec. 7, for "the Schedule" (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).

23Contd. from Previous page 1st April, 1953, for the States of Himachal Pradesh, Bilaspur, Kutch, Bhopal, Tripura, Vindhya Pradesh and Manipur vide Notification No. S.R.O. 666, dated 30th March, 1953, Gazette of India, 1953, Pt. II. Sec. 3, p. 451.

24 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 7, for "or misbranded cosmetic" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

25 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 7, for "adulterated" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
26 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 7, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

27 Now see the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962).

28 Ins. by Act 21 of 1962, sec. 9 (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).

29 Subs, by Act 22 of 1995, sec. 83, for "Customs Collector" (w.e.f. 26-5-1995).

30 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 9, for "after consultation with the Board" (w.e.f. 1-21983).

31 Ins. by Act 21 of 1962, sec. 10 (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).

32 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 9, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

33 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 9 for "section 9B" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

34 Subs, by Act 11 of 1955, sec. 7, for "to cure or mitigate" (w.e.f. 15-4-1955).

35 Ins. by Act 21 of 1962, sec. 10 (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).

36 Subs, by Act 3 of 1951, sec. 3 and Sch., for "the States" (w.e.f. 1-4-1951).

37 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 10, for section 13 (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

38 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 11, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

39 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 12, for "DRUGS" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

40 Subs, by Act 21 of 1962, sec. 12, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).

41 Subs, by Act 13 of 1964, sec. 11, for "the Schedule" (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).

42 Subs, by Act 11 of 1955, sec. 8, for "State Government" (w.e.f. 15-4-1955).

43Ins. by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 13 (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

44Ins. by Act 26 of 2008, sec. 2 (w.e.f. 10-8-2009).

45 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 14, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

46 Subs, by Act 11 of 1955, sec. 9, for "to cure or mitigate" (w.e.f. 15-4-1955).

47 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 14, for "sell, or stock or exhibit for sale" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

48 Ins. by Act 21 of 1962, sec. 14 (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).

49 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 14, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

50 Subs, by Act 11 of 1955, sec. 9, for "State Government" (w.e.f. 15-4-1955).

51 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 14, for "manufacture for sale, sale" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

52 Subs, by Act 21 of 1962, sec. 16, for "class of drugs" (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).

53 Ins. by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 17 (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

54 Subs, by Act 21 of 1962, sec. 17 for "class of drugs" (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).

55 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 19, for "in any place mentioned in clause (c)" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

56 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 19, for "the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898)" (w.e.f.1-2-1983).

57 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 19, for "section 98" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

58 Ins. by Act 21 of 1962, sec. 15 (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).

59 Subs, by Act 13 of 1964, sec. 16, for clause (iii) (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).

60 Subs, by Act 13 of 1964, sec. 17, for certain words (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).

61 Ins. by Act 21 of 1962, sec. 15 (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).

62 Ins. by Act 71 of 1986, sec. 2 (w.e.f. 15-9-1987).

63 Subs, by Act 71 of 1986, sec. 2, for "purchased by him" (w.e.f. 15-9-1987).

64 Subs, by Act 26 of 2008, sec. 6(ii)(B), for "less than one year and of fine of less than five thousand rupees" (w.e.f. 10-8-2009).

65 Subs, by Act 26 of 2008, sec. 6(iii)(A), for "not be less than three years but which may extend to five years and with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees" (w.e.f. 10-8-2009).

66Subs, by Act 26 of 2008, sec. 6(iii)(B), for "less than three years but not less than one year" (w.e.f.
10-8-2009).

67 Subs, by Act 26 of 2008, sec. 6(iv), for "and with fine" (w.e.f. 10-8-2009).

68 Subs, by Act 26 of 2008, sec. ll(a)(i)(B), for "less than two years and of fine of less than ten thousand rupees;" (w.e.f. 10-8-2009).

69 Subs, by Act 26 of 2008, sec. ll(a)(iii), for "five thousand rupees" (w.e.f. 10-8-2009).

70Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 25, for "one thousand rupees" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

71 The words "section 28 or" omitted by Act 13 of 1964, sec. 20 (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).

72 Subs, by Act 26 of 2008, sec. 11(b), for "ten years, or with fine, or with both" (w.e.f. 10-8-2009).

73 Section 31 re-numbered as sub-section (1) of that section by Act 35 of 1960, sec. 9 (w.e.f. 16-31961).

74 Added by Act 13 of 1964, sec. 21 (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).

75 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 26, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

76 Subs, by Act 13 of 1964, sec. 21, for "or is a misbranded drug" (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).

77 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 26, for "misbranded or adulterated drug, or misbranded cosmetic" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

78 Ins. by Act 13 of 1964, sec. 23 (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).

79 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 28, for "in sub-section (1) of section 351 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898)" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

80 Ins. by Act 21 of 1962, sec. 22 (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).

81 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 29, for "section 17B" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

82 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 29, for "for the manufacture for sale" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983)

83Ins. by Act 21 of 1962, sec. 22 (w.e.f. 27-7-1964).

84Ins. by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 29 (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

85 Subs, by Act 11 of 1955, sec. 15, for "to cure or mitigate" (w.e.f. 15-4-1955).

86 Ins. by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 29 (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

87 The word "and" omitted by Act 26 of 2008, sec. 14(ii) (w.e.f. 10-8-2009).

88 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 2, for "Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

89 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 31, for sections 33D and 33E (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

90 Subs, by Act 26 of 2008, sec. 15(a)(ii), for "five thousand rupees" (w.e.f. 10-8-2009).

91 Subs, by Act 26 of 2008, sec. 16(a), for "two thousand rupees" (w.e.f. 10-8-2009).

92 Subs, by Act 26 of 2008, sec. 16(b), for "five thousand rupees" (w.e.f. 10-8-2009).

93 Subs, by Act 26 of 2008, sec. 16(c), for "six months and with fine which shall not be less thanone thousand rupees." (w.e.f. 10-8-2009).

94 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 2, for "Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

95 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 2, for "Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

96 Ins. by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 34 (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

97 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 34, for "of a Presidency Magistrate or of a Magistrate of the first class" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

98 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 35, for "after consultation with the Board" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

99 Ins. by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 35 (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

100 The word "and" omitted by Act 26 of 2008, sec. 18(i) (w.e.f. 10-8-2009).

101 Section 33A re-numbered as section 33P by Act 13 of 1964, sec. 27 (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).

102 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 37, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

103 The words "section 32 of" omitted by Act 13 of 1964, sec. 29 (w.e.f. 15-9-1964).

104 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 38, for "the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898)" (w.e.f.
1-2-1983).

105 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 38, for "any Presidency Magistrate or any Magistrate of the first class" (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

106 Subs, by Act 26 of 2008, sec. 19, for "all offences under this Act" (w.e.f. 10-8-2009).

107 Subs, by Act 68 of 1982, sec. 40, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-2-1983).

*** End ***


================================================================================
SOURCE: THE PATENTS ACT, 1970.pdf
================================================================================

THE PATENTS ACT, 1970

ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions and interpretation.
CHAPTER II
INVENTIONS NOT PATENTABLE
3. What are not inventions.
4. Inventions relating to atomic energy not patentable.
CHAPTER III
APPLICATIONS FOR PATENTS
6. Persons entitled to apply for patents.
7. Form of application.
8. Information and undertaking regarding foreign applications.
9. Provisional and complete specifications.
10. Contents of specifications.

11. Priority dates of claims of a complete specification.

CHAPTER IV

PUBLICATION AND EXAMINATION OF APPLICATIONS 11A. Publication of applications.
11B. Request for examination.
12. Examination of application.
13. Search for anticipation by previous publication and by prior claim.
14. Consideration of report of examiner by Controller.
15. Power of Controller to refuse or require amended applications, etc., in certain cases.
16. Power of Controller to make orders respecting division of application.
17. Power of Controller to make orders respecting dating of application.
18. Powers of Controller in cases of anticipation.
19. Powers of Controller in case of potential infringement.
20. Powers of Controller to make orders regarding substitution of applicants etc.
21. Time for putting application in order for grant.

CHAPTER V
OPPOSITION PROCEEDINGS TO GRANT OF PATENTS
25. Opposition to patent.
26. In cases of “obtaining” Controller may treat the patent as the patent of opponent.
28. Mention of inventor as such in patent.
CHAPTER VI
ANTICIPATION
29. Anticipation by previous publication.
30. Anticipation by previous communication to Government.
31. Anticipation by public display, etc.
32. Anticipation by public working.
33. Anticipation by use and publication after provisional specification.
34. No anticipation if circumstances are only as described in sections 29, 30, 31 and 32.
CHAPTER VII
PROVISIONS FOR SECRECY OF CERTAIN INVENTIONS
35. Secrecy directions relating to inventions relevant for defence purposes.
36. Secrecy directions to be periodically reviewed.
37. Consequences of secrecy directions.
38. Revocation of secrecy directions and extension of time.
39. Residents not to apply for patents outside India without prior permission.
40. Liability for contravention of section 35 or section 39.
41. Finality of orders of Controller and Central Government.
42. Savings respecting disclosure to Government.
CHAPTER VIII
GRANT OF PATENTS AND RIGHTS CONFERRED THEREBY
43. Grant of patents.
44. Amendment of patent granted to deceased applicant.
45. Date of patent.
46. Form, extent and effect of patent.
47. Grant of patents to be subject to certain conditions.
48. Rights of patentees.
49. Patent rights not infringed when used on foreign vessels, etc., temporarily or accidentally in India.
50. Rights of co-owners of patents.
51. Power of Controller to give directions to co-owners.
52. Grant of patent to true and first inventions where it has been obtained by another in fraud of him.
53. Term of patent.

CHAPTER IX
PATENTS OF ADDITION
54. Patents of addition.
55. Term of patents of addition.
56. Validity of patents of addition.
CHAPTER X
AMENDMENT OF APPLICATIONS AND SPECIFICATIONS
57. Amendment of application and specification before Controller.
58. Amendment of specification before Appellate Board or High Court.
59. Supplementary provisions as to amendment of application or specification.
CHAPTER XI
RESTORATION OF LAPSED PATENTS
60. Applications for restoration of lapsed patents.
61. Procedure for disposal of applications for restoration of lapsed patents.
62. Rights of patentees of lapsed patents which have been restored.

CHAPTER XII
SURRENDER AND REVOCATION OF PATENTS
63. Surrender of patents.
64. Revocation of Power patents.
65. Revocation of patent or amendment of complete specification on directions from Government in cases relating to atomic energy.
66. Revocation of patent in public interest.
CHAPTER XIII
REGISTER OF PATENTS
67. Register of patents and particulars to be entered therein.
68. Assignments, etc., not to be valid unless in writing and duly executed.
69. Registration of assignments, transmissions, etc.
70. Power of registered grantee or proprietor to deal with patent.
71. Rectification of register by High Court.
72. Register to be open for inspection.
CHAPTER XIV
PATENT OFFICE AND ITS ESTABLISHMENT
73. Controller and other officers.
74. Patent office and its branches.
75. Restriction on employees of patent office as to right or interest in patents.
76. Officers and employees not to furnish information, etc.
CHAPTER XV
POWERS OF CONTROLLER GENERALLY
77. Controller to have certain powers of a civil court.
78. Power of Controller to correct clerical errors, etc.

79. Evidence how to be given and powers of Controller in respect thereof.
80. Exercise of discretionary powers by Controller.
81. Disposal by Controller of applications for extension of time.
CHAPTER XVI WORKING OF PATENTS, COMPULSORY LICENCES AND REVOCATION
82. Definition of “patented articles” and “patentee”.
83. General principles applicable to working of patented inventions.
84. Compulsory licences.
85. Revocation of patents by the Controller for non-working.
86. Power of Controller to adjourn applications for compulsory licences, etc., in certain cases.
87. Procedure for dealing with applications under sections 84 and 85.
88. Powers of Controller in granting compulsory licences.
89. General purposes for granting compulsory licences.
90. Terms and conditions of compulsory licences.
91. Licensing of related patents.
92. Special provision for compulsory licences on notifications by Central Government.
92A. Compulsory licence for export of patented pharmaceutical products in certain exceptional circumstances.
93. Order for licence to operate as a deed between parties concerned.
94. Termination of compulsory licence.
CHAPTER XVII
USE OF INVENTIONS FOR PURPOSES OF GOVERNMENT AND ACQUISITION OF INVENTIONS BY
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
99. Meaning of use of invention for purposes of Government.
100. Power of Central Government to use inventions for purposes of Government.
101. Rights of third parties in respect of use of invention for purposes of Government.
102. Acquisition of inventions and patents by the Central Government.
103. Reference to High Court of disputes as to use for purposes of Government.
CHAPTER XVIII
SUITS CONCERNING INFRINGEMENT OF PATENTS
104. Jurisdiction.
104A. Burden of proof in case of suits concerning infringement.
105. Power of court to make declaration as to non-infringement.
106. Power of court to grant relief in cases of groundless threats of infringement proceedings.
107. Defences, etc., in suit for infringement.
107A. Certain acts not to be considered as infringement.
108. Reliefs in suits for infringement.
109. Right of exclusive licensee to take proceedings against infringement.
110. Right of licensee under section 84 to take proceedings against infringement.
111. Restriction on power of court to grant damages or account of profits for infringement.

113. Certificate of validity of specification and costs of subsequent suits for infringement thereof.
114. Relief for infringement of partially valid specification.
115. Scientific advisers.
CHAPTER XIX APPEALS 117A. Appeals to High Court.
117B. [Omitted.] 117C. [Omitted.] 117D. [Omitted.] 117E. Appearance of Controller in legal proceedings.
117F. [Omitted.] 117G. [Omitted.] 117H. [Omitted.]
CHAPTER XX
PENALTIES
118. Contravention of Secrecy provisions relating to certain inventions.
119. Falsification of entries in register, etc.
120. Unauthorised claim of patent rights.
121. [Omitted.].
122. Refusal or failure to supply information.
123. Practice by non-registered patent agents.
124. Offences by companies.
124A. Adjudication of penalties.
124B. Appeal.
CHAPTER XXI
PATENT AGENTS
125. Register of patent agents.
126. Qualifications for registration as patent agents.
127. Rights of patent agents.
128. Subscription and verification of certain documents by patent agents.
129. Restrictions on practice as patent agents.
130. Removal from register of patent agents and restoration.
131. Power of Controller to refuse to deal with certain agents.
132. Savings in respect of other persons authorised to act as agents.

CHAPTER XXII
INTERNATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
133. Convention countries.
134. Notification as to countries not providing for reciprocity.
135. Convention applications.
136. Special provisions relating to convention applications.
137. Multiple priorities.
138. Supplementary provisions as to convention applications.
139. Other provisions of Act to apply to convention applications.
CHAPTER XXIII
MISCELLANEOUS
140. Avoidance of certain restrictive conditions.
141. Determination of certain contracts.
142. Fees.
143. Restrictions upon publication of specification.
144. Reports of Examiners to be confidential.
145. Publication of official journal.
146. Power of Controller to call for information from patentees.
147. Evidence of entries, documents, etc.
148. Declaration by infant, lunatic, etc.
149. Service of notices, etc., by post.
150. Security for costs.
151. Transmission of orders of courts to Controller.
153. Information relating to Patents.
154. Loss or destruction of Patents.
155. Reports of Controller to be placed before Parliament.
156. Patent to bind Government.
157. Right of Government to sell or use forfeited articles.
157A. Protection of security of India.
158. Power of High Courts to make rules.
159. Power of Central Government to make rules.
160. Rules to be placed before Parliament.
162. Repeal of Act 2 of 1911 in so far as it relates to patents and savings.
THE SCHEDULE.

THE PATENTS ACT, 1970 ACT NO. 39 OF 1970 [19th September, 1970.] An Act to amend and consolidate the law relating to patents.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Patents Act, 1970.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2. Definitions and interpretation.—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 2*

*

*

*;
(ab) “assignee” includes an assignee of the assignee and the legal representative of a deceased assignee and references to the assignee of any person include references to the assignee of the legal representative or assignee of that person;
3[(aba) “Budapest Treaty” means the Budapest Treaty on the International Recognition of the Deposit of Micro-organisms for the purposes of Patent Procedure done at Budapest on 28th day of April, 1977, as amended and modified from time to time;] (ac) “capable of industrial application”, in relation to an invention, means that the invention is capable of being made or used in an industry;] (b) “Controller” means the Controller General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks referred to in section 73;
(c) “convention application” means an application for a patent made by virtue of section 135;
4[(d) “convention country" means a country or a country which is member of a group of countries or a union of countries or an Inter-governmental organisation 5[referred to as a convention country in section 133;] (e) “district court” has the meaning assigned to that expression by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908);
(f) “exclusive licence” means a licence from a patentee which confers on the licensee, or on the licensee and persons authorised by him, to the exclusion of all other persons (including the patentee), any right in respect of the patented invention, and “exclusive licensee” shall be construed accordingly;
6*

*

*

*

*

1. 1-4-1978, vide notification No. S.O. 799, dated 10-3-1978, in respect of the provisions of sub-section (2) of s. 12 and sub-section (2) of s. 13, s. 28, s. 68, and ss. 125 to 132 see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3 (ii).
20-4-1972 vide notification No. S.O. 300 dated 20-4-1972, in respect of the provisions [except sub-section (2) of s. 12 and sub-section (2) of s. 13, s. 28, s. 68 and ss. 125 to 132] see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3 (ii).
2. Clause (a) omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13 (w.e.f.4-4-2021).
4. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 3, for clause (d) (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).
5. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 2, for “notified as such under sub-section (1) of section 133” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
6. Clause (g) omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

(h) “Government undertaking” means any industrial undertaking carried on— (i) by a department of the Government, or (ii) by a corporation established by a Central, Provincial or State Act, which is owned or controlled by the Government, or (iii) by a Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of
1956), 1[or] 1[(iv) by an institution wholly or substantially financed by the Government;] 2*

*

*

*

* 3[(i) “High Court", in relation to a State or Union territory, means the High Court having territorial jurisdiction in that State or Union territory, as the case may be;] 4[(ia) “international application” means an application for patent made in accordance with the Patent Cooperation Treaty;] 5[(j) “invention” means a new product or process involving an inventive step and capable of industrial application;
6[(ja) “inventive step” means a feature of an invention that involves technical advance as compared to the existing knowledge or having economic significance or both and that makes the invention not obvious to a person skilled in the art;]] (k) “legal representative” means a person who in law represents the estate of a deceased person;
7[(l) “new invention” means any invention or technology which has not been anticipated by publication in any document or used in the country or elsewhere in the world before the date of filing of patent application with complete specification, i.e., the subject matter has not fallen in public domain or that it does not form part of the state of the art;
(la) “Opposition Board” means an Opposition Board constituted under sub-section (3) of section 25;
(m) “patent” means a patent for any invention granted under this Act;] (n) “patent agent” means a person for the time being registered under this Act as a patent agent;
(o) “patented article” and “patented process” mean respectively an article or process in respect of which a patent is in force;
4[(oa) “Patent Cooperation Treaty” means the Patent Cooperation Treaty done at Washington on the 19th day of June, 1970 as amended and modified from time to time;] (p) “patentee” means the person for the time being entered on the register as the grantee or proprietor of the patent;
(q) “patent of addition” means a patent granted in accordance with section 54;
(r) “patent office” means the patent office referred to in section 74;
(s) “person" includes the Government;

2. The words “and includes the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research and any other institution which is financed wholly or for the major part by the said Council” omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-1-2005)
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause (i) (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
5.Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clause (j) (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).
6. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 2, for clause (ja) (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
7. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clauses (l) and (m) (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

(t) “person interested” includes a person engaged in, or in promoting, research in the same field as that to which the invention relates;
1[(ta) “pharmaceutical substance" means any new entity involving one or more inventive steps;] 2[(u) “prescribed” means,— (A) in relation to proceedings before a High Court, prescribed by rules made by the High Court;
3*

*

*

*

* (C) in other cases, prescribed by rules made under this Act;] (v) “prescribed manner” includes the payment of the prescribed fee;
(w) “priority date” has the meaning assigned to it by section 11;
(x) “register” means the register of patents referred to in section 67;
(y) “true and first inventor” does not include either the first importer of an invention into India, or a person to whom an invention is first communicated from outside India.
(2) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, any reference— (a) to the Controller shall be construed as including a reference to any officer discharging the functions of the Controller in pursuance of section 73;
(b) to the patent office shall be construed as including a reference to any branch office of the patent office.
CHAPTER II
INVENTIONS NOT PATENTABLE
3. What are not inventions.—The following are not inventions within the meaning of this Act,— (a) an invention which is frivolous or which claims anything obviously contrary to well established natural laws;
4[(b) an invention the primary or intended use or commercial exploitation of which would be contrary to public order or morality or which causes serious prejudice to human, animal or plant life or health or to the environment;] (c) the mere discovery of a scientific principle or the formulation of an abstract theory 5[or discovery of any living thing or non-living substance occurring in nature];
6[(d) the mere discovery of a new form of a known substance which does not result in the enhancement of the known efficacy of that substance or the mere discovery of any new property or new use for a known substance or of the mere use of a known process, machine or apparatus unless such known process results in a new product or employs at least one new reactant.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, salts, esters, ethers, polymorphs, metabolites, pure form, particle size, isomers, mixtures of isomers, complexes, combinations and other derivatives of known substance shall be considered to be the same substance, unless they differ significantly in properties with regard to efficacy;]

2. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 3, for clause (u) (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).
3. Sub-clause (B) omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13 (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).
4. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 4, for clause (b) (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).
6. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 3, for clause (d) (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

(e) a substance obtained by a mere admixture resulting only in the aggregation of the properties of the components thereof or a process for producing such substance;
(f) the mere arrangement or re-arrangement or duplication of known devices each functioning independently of one another in a known way;
1*

*

*

*

* (h) a method of agriculture or horticulture;
(i) any process for the medicinal, surgical, curative, prophylactic 2[diagnostic, therapeutic] or other treatment of human beings or any process for a similar treatment of animals 3*** to render them free of disease or to increase their economic value or that of their products.
2[(j) plants and animals in whole or any part thereof other than micro-organisms but including seeds, varieties and species and essentially biological processes for production or propagation of plants and animals;
(k) a mathematical or business method or a computer programme per se or algorithms;
(l) a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work or any other aesthetic creation whatsoever including cinematographic works and television productions;
(m) a mere scheme or rule or method of performing mental act or method of playing game;
(n) a presentation of information;
(o) topography of integrated circuits;
(p) an invention which, in effect, is traditional knowledge or which is an aggregation or duplication of known properties of traditionally known component or components.]
4. Inventions relating to atomic energy not patentable.—No patent shall be granted in respect of an invention relating to atomic energy falling within sub-section (1) of section 20 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 (33 of 1962).
5. [Inventions where only methods or processes of manufacture patentable.] Omitted by the Patents (Amendment) Act, 2005 (15 of 2005), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
CHAPTER III
APPLICATIONS FOR PATENTS
6. Persons entitled to apply for patents.—(1) Subject to the provisions contained in section 134, an application for a patent for an invention may be made by any of the following persons, that is to say,— (a) by any person claiming to be the true and first inventor of the invention;
(b) by any person being the assignee of the person claiming to be the true and first inventor in respect of the right to make such an application;
(c) by the legal representative of any deceased person who immediately before his death was entitled to make such an application.
(2) An application under sub-section (1) may be made by any of the persons referred to therein either alone or jointly with any other person.
7. Form of application.—(1) Every application for a patent shall be for one invention only and shall be made in the prescribed form and filed in the patent office.

1. Clause (g) omitted by Act 38 of 2002, s. 4 (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).
3. The words “or plants” omitted by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).

1[(1A) Every international application under the Patent Cooperation Treaty for a patent, as may be filed designating India, shall be deemed to be an application under this Act, if a corresponding application has also been filed before the Controller in India.] 2[(1B) The filing date of an application referred to in sub-section (1A) and its complete specification processed by the patent office as designated office or elected office shall be the international filing date accorded under the Patent Cooperation Treaty.] (2) Where the application is made by virtue of an assignment of the right to apply for a patent for the invention, there shall be furnished with the application, or within such period as may be prescribed after the filling of the application, proof of the right to make the application.
(3) Every application under this section shall state that the applicant is in possession of the invention and shall name the 3[person] claiming to be the true and first inventor; and where the person so claiming is not the applicant or one of the applicants, the application shall contain a declaration that the applicant believes the person so named to be the true and first inventor.
4[(4) Every such application (not being a convention application or an application filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty designating India) shall be accompanied by a provisional or a complete specification.]
8. Information and undertaking regarding foreign applications.—(1) Where an applicant for a patent under this Act is prosecuting either alone or jointly with any other person an application for a patent in any country outside India in respect of the same or substantially the same invention, or where to his knowledge such an application is being prosecuted by some person through whom he claims or by some person deriving title from him, he shall file along with his application 5[or subsequently 6[within the prescribed period as the Controller may allow]]— 7[(a) a statement setting out detailed particulars of such application; and] (b) an undertaking that, 8[up to the date of grant of patent in India], he would keep the Controller informed in writing, from time to time, of 9[detailed particulars as required under] clause (a) in respect of every other application relating to the same or substantially the same invention, if any, filed in any country outside India subsequently to the filing of the statement referred to in the aforesaid clause within the prescribed time.
10[(2) At any time after an application for patent is filed in India and till the grant of a patent or refusal to grant of a patent made thereon, the Controller may also require the applicant to furnish details, as may be prescribed, relating to the processing of the application in a country outside India, and in that event the applicant shall furnish to the Controller information available to him within such period as may be prescribed.]
9. Provisional and complete specifications.—11[(1) Where an application for a patent (not being a convention application or an application filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty designating India) is accompanied by a provisional specification, a complete specification shall be filed within twelve months from the date of filing of the application, and if the complete specification is not so filed, the application shall be deemed to be abandoned.]

3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “owner” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
6. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 6, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
7. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 7, for clause (a) (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).
8. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 6, for “up to the date of the acceptance of his complete specification filed in India (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
9. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 7, for “details of the nature referred to in” (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).

(2) Where two or more applications in the name of the same applicant are accompanied by provisional specifications in respect of inventions which are cognate or of which one is a modification of another and the Controller is of opinion that the whole of such inventions are such as to constitute a single invention and may properly be included in one patent, he may allow one complete specification to be filed in respect of all such provisional specifications:
1[Provided that the period of time specified under sub-section (1) shall be reckoned from the date of filing of the earliest provisional specification.] 2[(3) Where an application for a patent (not being a convention application or an application filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty designating India) is accompanied by a specification purporting to be a complete specification, the Controller may, if the applicant so requests at any time within twelve months from the date of filing of the application, direct that such specification shall be treated, for the purposes of this Act, as a provisional specification and proceed with the application accordingly.] (4) Where a complete specification has been filed in pursuance of an application for a patent accompanied by a provisional specification or by a specification treated by virtue of a direction under sub-section (3) as a provisional specification, the Controller may, if the applicant so requests at any time before 3[grant of patent], cancel the provisional specification and post-date the application to the date of filing of the complete specification.
10. Contents of specifications.—(1) Every specification, whether provisional or complete, shall describe the invention and shall begin with a title sufficiently indicating the subject-matter to which the invention relates.
(2) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf under this Act, drawings may, and shall, if the Controller so requires, be supplied for the purposes of any specification, whether complete or provisional;
and any drawings so supplied shall, unless the Controller otherwise directs, be deemed to form part of the specification, and references in this Act to a specification shall be construed accordingly.
(3) If, in any particular case, the Controller considers that an application should be further supplemented by a model or sample of anything illustrating the invention or alleged to constitute an invention, such model or sample as he may require shall be furnished 4[before the application is found in order for grant of a patent], but such model or sample shall not be deemed to form part of the specification.
(4) Every complete specification shall— (a) fully and particularly describe the invention and its operation or use and the method by which it is to be performed;
(b) disclose the best method of performing the invention which is known to the applicant and for which he is entitled to claim protection; and (c) end with a claim or claims defining the scope of the invention for which protection is claimed.
5[(d) be accompanied by an abstract to provide technical information on the invention:
Provided that— (i) the Controller may amend the abstract for providing better information to third parties; and

1. The proviso ins. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “the acceptance of the complete specification” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
4. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “before the acceptance of the application” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

(ii) if the applicant mentions a biological material in the specification which may not be described in such a way as to satisfy clauses (a) and (b), and if such material is not available to the public, the application shall be completed by depositing 1[the material to an international depository authority under the Budapest Treaty] and by fulfilling the following conditions, namely:— 2[(A) the deposit of the material shall be made not later than the date of filing the patent application in India and a reference thereof shall be made in the specification within the prescribed period];
(B) all the available characteristics of the material required for it to be correctly identified or indicated are included in the specification including the name, address of the depository institution and the date and number of the deposit of the material at the institution;
(C) access to the material is available in the depository institution only after the date of the application for patent in India or if priority is claimed after the date of the priority;
(D) disclose the source and geographical origin of the biological material in the specification, when used in an invention.] 3[(4A) In case of an international application designating India, the title, description, drawings, abstract and claims filed with the application shall be taken as the complete specification for the purposes of this Act.] 4[(5) The claim or claims of a complete specification shall relate to a single invention, or to a group of inventions linked so as to form a single inventive concept, shall be clear and succinct and shall be fairly based on the matter disclosed in the specification.] (6) A declaration as to the inventorship of the invention shall, in such cases as may be prescribed, be furnished in the prescribed form with the complete specification or within such period as may be prescribed after the filing of that specification.
(7) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, a complete specification filed after a provisional specification may include claims in respect of developments of, or additions to, the invention which was described in the provisional specification, being developments or additions in respect of which the applicant would be entitled under the provisions of section 6 to make a separate application for a patent.
11. Priority dates of claims of a complete specification.—(1) There shall be a priority date for each claim of a complete specification.
(2) Where a complete specification is filed in pursuance of a single application accompanied by— (a) a provisional specification; or (b) a specification which is treated by virtue of a direction under sub-section (3) of section 9 as a provisional specification, and the claim is fairly based on the matter disclosed in the specification referred to in clause (a) or clause (b), the priority date of that claim shall be the date of the filing of the relevant specification.
(3) Where the complete specification is filed or proceeded with in pursuance of two or more applications accompanied by such specifications as are mentioned in sub-section (2) and the claim is fairly based on the matter disclosed— (a) in one of those specifications, the priority date of that claim shall be the date of the filing of the application accompanied by that specification;

1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 8, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for sub-clause (A) (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
3. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for sub-section (4A) (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

(b) partly in one and partly in another, the priority date of that claim shall be the date of the filing of the application accompanied by the specification of the later date.
1[(3A) Where a complete specification based on a previously filed application in India has been filed within twelve months from the date of that application and the claim is fairly based on the matter disclosed in the previously filed application, the priority date of that claim shall be the date of the previously filed application in which the matter was first disclosed.] (4) Where the complete specification has been filed in pursuance of a further application made by virtue of sub-section (1) of section 16 and the claim is fairly based on the matter disclosed in any of the earlier specifications, provisional or complete, as the case may be, the priority date of that claim shall be the date of the filing of that specification in which the matter was first disclosed.
(5) Where, under the foregoing provisions of this section, any claim of a complete specification would, but for the provisions of this sub-section, have two or more priority dates, the priority date of that claim shall be the earlier or earliest of those dates.
(6) In any case to which sub-sections (2), (3), 1[(3A)], (4) and (5) do not apply, the priority date of a claim shall, subject to the provisions of section 137, be the date of filing of the complete specification.
(7) The reference to the date of the filing of the application or of the complete specification in this section shall, in cases where there has been a post-dating under section 9 or section 17 or, as the case may be, ante-dating under section 16, be a reference to the date as so post-dated or ante-dated.
(8) A claim in a complete specification of a patent shall not be invalid by reason only of— (a) the publication or use of the invention so far as claimed in that claim on or after the priority date of such claim; or (b) the grant of another patent which claims the invention, so far as claimed in the first mentioned claim, in a claim of the same or a later priority date.
CHAPTER IV 2[PUBLICATION AND EXAMINATION OF APPLICATIONS] 3[11A. Publication of applications.—4[(1) Save as otherwise provided, no application for patent shall ordinarily be opened to the public for such period as may be prescribed.
(2) The applicant may, in the prescribed manner, request the Controller to publish his application at any time before the expiry of the period prescribed under sub-section (1) and subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the Controller shall publish such application as soon as possible.
(3) Every application for a patent shall, on the expiry of the period specified under sub-section (1), be published, except in cases where the application— (a) in which secrecy direction is imposed under section 35; or (b) has been abandoned under sub-section (1) of section 9; or (c) has been withdrawn three months prior to the period specified under sub-section (1)].

2. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 9, for the Chapter heading “EXAMINATION OF APPLICATION” (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).
4. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 10, for sub-sections (1) to (3) (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

(4) In case a secrecy direction has been given in respect of an application under section 35, then, it shall be published after the expiry of the period 1[prescribed under sub-section (1)] or when the secrecy direction has ceased to operate, whichever is later.
(5) The publication of every application under this section shall include the particulars of the date of application, number of application, name and address of the applicant identifying the application and an abstract.
(6) Upon publication of an application for a patent under this section— (a) the depository institution shall make the biological material mentioned in the specification available to the public;
(b) the patent office may, on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, make the specification and drawings, if any, of such application available to the public.
2[(7) On and from the date of publication of the application for patent and until the date of grant of a patent in respect of such application, the applicant shall have the like privileges and rights as if a patent for the invention had been granted on the date of publication of the application:
Provided that the applicant shall not be entitled to institute any proceedings for infringement until the patent has been granted:
Provided further that the rights of a patentee in respect of applications made under sub-section (2) of section 5 before the 1st day of January, 2005 shall accrue from the date of grant of the patent:
Provided also that after a patent is granted in respect of applications made under sub-section (2) of section 5, the patent-holder shall only be entitled to receive reasonable royalty from such enterprises which have made significant investment and were producing and marketing the concerned product prior to the 1st day of January, 2005 and which continue to manufacture the product covered by the patent on the date of grant of the patent and no infringement proceedings shall be instituted against such enterprises.] 11B. Request for examination.—3[(1) No application for a patent shall be examined unless the applicant or any other interested person makes a request in the prescribed manner for such examination within the prescribed period.] 4*

*

*

*

* 5[(3) In case of an application in respect of a claim for a patent filed under sub-section (2) of section 5 before the 1st day of January, 2005 a request for its examination shall be made in the prescribed manner and within the prescribed period by the applicant or any other interested person.] (4) In case the applicant or any other interested person does not make a request for examination of the application for a patent within the period as specified under sub-section (1) 6*** or sub-section (3), the application shall be treated as withdrawn by the applicant:
7[Provided that— (i) the applicant may, at any time after filing the application but before the grant of a patent, withdraw the application by making a request in the prescribed manner; and (ii) in a case where secrecy direction has been issued under section 35, the request for examination may be made within the prescribed period from the date of revocation of the secrecy direction.]

1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 10, for “of eighteen months” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
6. The words, brackets and figure “or sub-section (2)” omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
7. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for the proviso (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

12. Examination of application.—1[(1) When a request for examination has been made in respect of an application for a patent in the prescribed manner 2[under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) of section 11B, the application and specification and other documents related thereto shall be referred at the earliest by the Controller] to an examiner for making a report to him in respect of the following matters, namely:— (a) whether the application and the 3[specification and other documents relating thereto] are in accordance with the requirements of this Act and of any rules made thereunder;
(b) whether there is any lawful ground of objection to the grant of the patent under this Act in pursuance of the application;
(c) the result of investigations made under section 13; and (d) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(2) The examiner to whom the application and the 3[specification and other documents relating thereto] are referred under sub-section (1) shall ordinarily make the report to the Controller within 4[such period as may be prescribed].
13. Search for anticipation by previous publication and by prior claim.—(1) The examiner to whom an application for a patent is referred under section 12 shall make investigation for the purpose of ascertaining whether the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification— (a) has been anticipated by publication before the date of filing of the applicant’s complete specification in any specification filed in pursuance of an application for a patent made in India and dated on or after the 1st day of January, 1912;
(b) is claimed in any claim of any other complete specification published on or after the date of filing of the applicant’s complete specification, being a specification filed in pursuance of an application for a patent made in India and dated before or claiming the priority date earlier than that date.
(2) The examiner shall, in addition, make such investigation 5*** for the purpose of ascertaining whether the invention, so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification, has been anticipated by publication in India or elsewhere in any document other than those mentioned in sub-section (1) before the date of filing of the applicant’s complete specification.
(3) Where a complete specification is amended under the provisions of this Act before 6[the grant of a patent], the amended specification shall be examined and investigated in like manner as the original specification.
(4) The examination and investigations required under section 12 and this section shall not be deemed in any way to warrant the validity of any patent, and no liability shall be incurred by the Central Government or any officer thereof by reason of, or in connection with, any such examination or investigation or any report or other proceedings consequent thereon.
7[14. Consideration of report of examiner by Controller.—Where, in respect of an application for a patent, the report of the examiner received by the Controller is adverse to the applicant or requires any amendment of the application, the specification or other documents to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Act or of the rules made thereunder, the Controller, before proceeding to dispose of the application in accordance with the provisions hereinafter appearing, shall communicate as expeditiously as possible the gist of the objections to the applicant and shall, if so required by the applicant within the prescribed period, give him an opportunity of being heard.

1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 10, for certain words (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 12, for certain words, brackets, figures and letter (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
3. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 10, for “specification relating thereto” (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).
4. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 12, for “a period of eighteen months from the date of such reference” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
5. The words “as the Controller may direct” omitted by Act 38 of 2002, s. 11 (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).
6. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 13, for “it has been accepted” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
7. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for sections 14 and 15 (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

15. Power of Controller to refuse or require amended applications, etc., in certain cases.—Where the Controller is satisfied that the application or any specification or any other document filed in pursuance thereof does not comply with the requirements of this Act or of any rules made thereunder, the Controller may refuse the application or may require the application, specification or the other documents, as the case may be, to be amended to his satisfaction before he proceeds with the application and refuse the application on failure to do so.]
16. Power of Controller to make orders respecting division of application.—(1) A person who has made an application for a patent under this Act may, at any time 1[before the grant of the patent], if he so desires, or with a view to remedy the objection raised by the Controller on the ground that the claims of the complete specification relate to more than one invention, file a further application in respect of an invention disclosed in the provisional or complete specification already filed in respect of the first mentioned application.
(2) The further application under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by a complete specification, but such complete specification shall not include any matter not in substance disclosed in the complete specification filed in pursuance of the first mentioned application.
(3) The Controller may require such amendment of the complete specification filed in pursuance of either the original or the further application as may be necessary to ensure that neither of the said complete specifications includes a claim for any matter claimed in the other.
2[Explanation.— For the purposes of this Act, the further application and the complete specification accompanying it shall be deemed to have been filed on the date on which the first mentioned application had been filed, and the further application shall be proceeded with as a substantive application and be examined when the request for examination is filed within the prescribed period.]
17. Power of Controller to make orders respecting dating of application.—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 9, at any time after the filing of an application and 3[before the grant of the patent] under this Act, the Controller may, at the request of the applicant made in the prescribed manner, direct that the application shall be post-dated to such date as may be specified in the request, and proceed with the application accordingly:
Provided that no application shall be post-dated under this sub-section to a date later than six months from the date on which it was actually made or would, but for the provisions of this sub-section, be deemed to have been made.
4[(2) Where an application or specification (including drawings) or any other documents is required to be amended under section 15, the application or specification or other document shall, if the Controller so directs, be deemed to have been made on the date on which the requirement is complied with or where the application or specification or other document is returned to the applicant, on the date on which it is refiled after complying with the requirement.]
18. Power of Controller in cases of anticipation.—(1) Where it appears to the Controller that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification has been anticipated in the manner referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 13, he may refuse to 5[the application] unless the applicant— (a) shows to the satisfaction of the Controller that the priority date of the claim of his complete specification is not later than the date on which the relevant document was published; or (b) amends his complete specification to the satisfaction of the Controller.

1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 15, for “before the acceptance of the complete specification” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for the Explanation (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
3. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for “before the acceptance of the complete specification” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
5. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 17, for “to accept the complete specification” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

(2) If it appears to the Controller that the invention is claimed in a claim of any other complete specification referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 13, he may, subject to the provisions hereinafter contained, direct that a reference to that other specification shall be inserted by way of notice to the public in the applicant’s complete specification unless within such time as may be prescribed,— (a) the applicant shows to the satisfaction of the Controller that the priority date of his claim is not later than the priority date of the claim of the said other specification; or (b) the complete specification is amended to the satisfaction of the Controller.
(3) If it appears to the Controller, as a result of an investigation under section 13 or otherwise,— (a) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the applicant’s complete specification has been claimed in any other complete specification referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 13; and (b) that such other complete specification was published on or after the priority date of the applicant’s claim, then, unless it is shown to the satisfaction of the Controller that the priority date of the applicant’s claim is not later than the priority date of the claim of that specification, the provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply thereto in the same manner as they apply to a specification published on or after the date of filing of the applicant’s complete specification.
1*

*

*

*

*
19. Powers of Controller in case of potential infringement.—(1) If, in consequence of the investigations required 2[under this Act], it appears to the Controller that an invention in respect of which an application for a patent has been made cannot be performed without substantial risk of infringement of a claim of any other patent, he may direct that a reference to that other patent shall be inserted in the applicant’s complete specification by way of notice to the public, unless within such time as may be prescribed— (a) the applicant shows to the satisfaction of the Controller that there are reasonable grounds for contesting the validity of the said claim of the other patent; or (b) the complete specification is amended to the satisfaction of the Controller.
(2) Where, after a reference to another patent has been inserted in a complete specification in pursuance of a direction under sub-section (1)— (a) that other patent is revoked or otherwise ceases to be in force; or (b) the specification of that other patent is amended by the deletion of the relevant claim; or (c) it is found, in proceedings before the court or the Controller, that the relevant claim of that other patent is invalid or is not infringed by any working of the applicant’s invention, the Controller may, on the application of the applicant, delete the reference to that other patent.
20. Powers of Controller to make orders regarding substitution of applicants, etc.—(1) If the Controller is satisfied, on a claim made in the prescribed manner at any time before a patent has been granted, that by virtue of any assignment or agreement in writing made by the applicant or one of the applicants for the patent or by operation of law, the claimant would, if the patent were then granted be entitled thereto or to the interest of the applicant therein, or to an undivided share of the patent or of that interest, the Controller may, subject to the provisions of this section, direct that the application shall proceed in the name of the claimant or in the names of the claimants and the applicant or the other joint applicant or applicants, accordingly as the case may require.
(2) No such direction as aforesaid shall be given by virtue of any assignment or agreement made by one of two or more joint applicants for a patent except with the consent of the other joint applicant or applicants.

2. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for “by the foregoing provisions of this Act or of proceedings under section 25” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

(3) No such direction as aforesaid shall be given by virtue of any assignment or agreement for the assignment of the benefit of an invention unless— (a) the invention is identified therein by reference to the number of the application for the patent; or (b) there is produced to the Controller an acknowledgment by the person by whom the assignment or agreement was made that the assignment or agreement relates to the invention in respect of which that application is made; or (c) the rights of the claimant in respect of the invention have been finally established by the decision of a court; or (d) the Controller gives directions for enabling the application to proceed or for regulating the manner in which it should be proceeded with under sub-section (5).
(4) Where one of two or more joint applicants for a patent dies at any time before the patent has been granted, the Controller may, upon a request in that behalf made by the survivor or survivors, and with the consent of the legal representative of the deceased, direct that the application shall proceed in the name of the survivor or survivors alone.
(5) If any dispute arises between joint applicants for a patent whether or in what manner the application should be proceeded with, the Controller may, upon application made to him in the prescribed manner by any of the parties, and after giving to all parties concerned an opportunity to be heard, give such directions as he thinks fit for enabling the application to proceed in the name of one or more of the parties alone or for regulating the manner in which it should be proceeded with, or for both those purposes, as the case may require.
1[21. Time for putting application in order for grant.—(1) An application for a patent shall be deemed to have been abandoned unless, within such period as may be prescribed, the applicant has complied with all the requirements imposed on him by or under this Act, whether in connection with the complete specification or otherwise in relation to the application from the date on which the first statement of objections to the application or complete specification or other documents related thereto is forwarded to the applicant by the Controller.
Explanation.—Where the application for a patent or any specification or, in the case of a convention application or an application filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty designating India any document filed as part of the application has been returned to the applicant by the Controller in the course of the proceedings, the applicant shall not be deemed to have complied with such requirements unless and until he has refiled it or the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Controller that for the reasons beyond his control such document could not be refiled.
(2) If at the expiration of the period as prescribed under sub-section (1),— (a) an appeal to the High Court is pending in respect of the application for the patent for the main invention; or (b) in the case of an application for a patent of addition, an appeal to the High Court is pending in respect of either that application or the application for the main invention, the time within which the requirements of the Controller shall be complied with shall, on an application made by the applicant before the expiration of the period as prescribed under sub-section (1), be extended until such date as the High Court may determine.
(3) If the time within which the appeal mentioned in sub-section (2) may be instituted has not expired, the Controller may extend the period as prescribed under sub-section (1), to such further period as he may determine:
Provided that if an appeal has been filed during the said further period, and the High Court has granted any extension of time for complying with the requirements of the Controller, then the requirements may be complied with within the time granted by the Court.]

22. [Acceptance of complete specification.]—Omitted by Act The Patents (Amendment) Act, 2005 (15 of 2005), s. 20 (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
23. [Advertisement of acceptance of complete specification.]—Omitted by s. 20, ibid.
(w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
24. [Effect of acceptance of complete specification.]—Omitted by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
1*

*

*

*

* CHAPTER V 2[OPPOSITION PROCEEDINGS TO GRANT OF PATENTS] 3[25. Opposition to the patent.—(1) Where an application for a patent has been published but a patent has not been granted, any person may, in writing, represent by way of opposition to the Controller against the grant of patent on the ground— (a) that the applicant for the patent or the person under or through whom he claims, wrongfully obtained the invention or any part thereof from him or from a person under or through whom he claims;
(b) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification has been published before the priority date of the claim— (i) in any specification filed in pursuance of an application for a patent made in India on or after the 1st day of January, 1912; or (ii) in India or elsewhere, in any other document:
Provided that the ground specified in sub-clause (ii) shall not be available where such publication does not constitute an anticipation of the invention by virtue of sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 29;
(c) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is claimed in a claim of a complete specification published on or after the priority date of the applicant’s claim and filed in pursuance of an application for a patent in India, being a claim of which the priority date is earlier than that of the applicant’s claim;
(d) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification was publicly known or publicly used in India before the priority date of that claim.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, an invention relating to a process for which a patent is claimed shall be deemed to have been publicly known or publicly used in India before the priority date of the claim if a product made by that process had already been imported into India before that date except where such importation has been for the purpose of reasonable trial or experiment only;
(e) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is obvious and clearly does not involve any inventive step, having regard to the matter published as mentioned in clause (b) or having regard to what was used in India before the priority date of the applicant’s claim;
(f) that the subject of any claim of the complete specification is not an invention within the meaning of this Act, or is not patentable under this Act;
(g) that the complete specification does not sufficiently and clearly describe the invention or the method by which it is to be performed;
(h) that the applicant has failed to disclose to the Controller the information required by section 8 or has furnished the information which in any material particular was false to his knowledge;
(i) that in the case of a convention application, the application was not made within twelve months from the date of the first application for protection for the invention made in a convention country by the applicant or a person from whom he derives title;

1. Chapter IVA omitted by Act 15 of 2005, s. 21 (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
2. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for Chapter Heading (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
3. Subs. by s. 23, ibid., for sections 25 and 26 (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

(j) that the complete specification does not disclose or wrongly mentions the source or geographical origin of biological material used for the invention;
(k) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is anticipated having regard to the knowledge, oral or otherwise, available within any local or indigenous community in India or elsewhere, but on no other ground and the Controller shall, if requested by such person for being heard, hear him and dispose of such representation in such manner and within such period as may be prescribed.
(2) At any time after the grant of patent but before the expiry of a period of one year from the date of publication of grant of a patent, any person interested may give notice of opposition to the Controller in the prescribed manner on any of the following grounds, namely:— (a) that the patentee or the person under or through whom he claims, wrongfully obtained the invention or any part thereof from him or from a person under or through whom he claims;
(b) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification has been published before the priority date of the claim— (i) in any specification filed in pursuance of an application for a patent made in India on or after the 1st day of January, 1912; or (ii) in India or elsewhere, in any other document:
Provided that the ground specified in sub-clause (ii) shall not be available where such publication does not constitute an anticipation of the invention by virtue of sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 29;
(c) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is claimed in a claim of a complete specification published on or after the priority date of the claim of the patentee and filed in pursuance of an application for a patent in India, being a claim of which the priority date is earlier than that of the claim of the patentee;
(d) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification was publicly known or publicly used in India before the priority date of that claim.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, an invention relating to a process for which a patent is granted shall be deemed to have been publicly known or publicly used in India before the priority date of the claim if a product made by that process had already been imported into India before that date except where such importation has been for the purpose of reasonable trial or experiment only;
(e) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is obvious and clearly does not involve any inventive step, having regard to the matter published as mentioned in clause (b) or having regard to what was used in India before the priority date of the claim;
(f) that the subject of any claim of the complete specification is not an invention within the meaning of this Act, or is not patentable under this Act;
(g) that the complete specification does not sufficiently and clearly describe the invention or the method by which it is to be performed;
(h) that the patentee has failed to disclose to the Controller the information required by section 8 or has furnished the information which in any material particular was false to his knowledge;
(i) that in the case of a patent granted on convention application, the application for patent was not made within twelve months from the date of the first application for protection for the invention made in a convention country or in India by the patentee or a person from whom he derives title;
(j) that the complete specification does not disclose or wrongly mentions the source and geographical origin of biological material used for the invention;

(k) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification was anticipated having regard to the knowledge, oral or otherwise, available within any local or indigenous community in India or elsewhere, but on no other ground.
(3) (a) Where any such notice of opposition is duly given under sub-section (2), the Controller shall notify the patentee.
(b) On receipt of such notice of opposition, the Controller shall, by order in writing, constitute a Board to be known as the Opposition Board consisting of such officers as he may determine and refer such notice of opposition along with the documents to that Board for examination and submission of its recommendations to the Controller.
(c) Every Opposition Board constituted under clause (b) shall conduct the examination in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed.
(4) On receipt of the recommendation of the Opposition Board and after giving the patentee and the opponent an opportunity of being heard, the Controller shall order either to maintain or to amend or to revoke the patent.
(5) While passing an order under sub-section (4) in respect of the ground mentioned in clause (d) or clause (e) of sub-section (2), the Controller shall not take into account any personal document or secret trial or secret use.
(6) In case the Controller issues an order under sub-section (4) that the patent shall be maintained subject to amendment of the specification or any other document, the patent shall stand amended accordingly.
26. In cases of “obtaining” Controller may treat the patent as the patent of opponent.—(1) Where in any opposition proceeding under this Act the Controller finds that— (a) the invention, so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification, was obtained from the opponent in the manner set out in clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 25 and revokes the patent on that ground, he may, on request by such opponent made in the prescribed manner, direct that the patent shall stand amended in the name of the opponent;
(b) a part of an invention described in the complete specification was so obtained from the opponent, he may pass an order requiring that the specification be amended by the exclusion of that part of the invention.
(2) Where an opponent has, before the date of the order of the Controller requiring the amendment of a complete specification referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1), filed an application for a patent for an invention which included the whole or a part of the invention held to have been obtained from him and such application is pending, the Controller may treat such application and specification in so far as they relate to the invention held to have been obtained from him, as having been filed, for the purposes of this Act relating to the priority dates of claims of the complete specification, on the date on which the corresponding document was or was deemed to have been filed by the patentee in the earlier application but for all other purposes the application of the opponent shall be proceeded with as an application for a patent under this Act.]
27. [Refusal of patent without opposition.]—Omitted by Act the Patents (Amendment) Act, 2005 (15 of 2005), s. 20 (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
28. Mention of inventor as such in patent.—(1) If the Controller is satisfied, upon a request or claim made in accordance with the provisions of this section,— (a) that the person in respect of or by whom the request or claim is made is the inventor of an invention in respect of which application for a patent has been made, or of a substantial part of that invention; and (b) that the application for the patent is a direct consequence of his being the inventor,

the Controller shall, subject to the provisions of this section, cause him to be mentioned as inventor in any patent granted in pursuance of the application in the complete specification and in the register of Patents:
Provided that the mention of any person as inventor under this section shall not confer or derogate from any rights under the patent.
(2) A request that any person shall be mentioned as aforesaid may be made in the prescribed manner by the applicant for the patent or (where the person alleged to be the inventor is not the applicant or one of the applicants) by the applicant and that person.
(3) If any person [other than a person in respect of whom a request in relation to the application in question has been made under sub-section (2)] desires to be mentioned as aforesaid, he may make a claim in the prescribed manner in that behalf.
1[(4) A request or claim under the foregoing provisions of this section shall be made before the grant of patent.] 2*

*

*

*

* (6) 3[Where] a claim is made under sub-section (3), the Controller shall give notice of the claim to every applicant for the patent (not being the claimant) and to any other person whom the Controller may consider to be interested; and before deciding upon any request or claim made under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), the Controller shall, if required, hear the person in respect of or by whom the request or claim is made, and, in the case of a claim under sub-section (3), any person to whom notice of the claim has been given as aforesaid.
(7) Where any person has been mentioned as inventor in pursuance of this section any other person who alleges that he ought not to have been so mentioned may at any time apply to the Controller for a certificate to that effect, and the Controller may, after hearing, if required, any person whom he may consider to be interested, issue such a certificate, and if he does so, he shall rectify the specification and the register accordingly.
CHAPTER VI
ANTICIPATION
29. Anticipation by previous publication.—(1) An invention claimed in a complete specification shall not be deemed to have been anticipated by reason only that the invention was published in a specification filed in pursuance of an application for a patent made in India and dated before the 1st day of January, 1912.
(2) Subject as hereinafter provided, an invention claimed in a complete specification shall not be deemed to have been anticipated by reason only that the invention was published before the priority date of the relevant claim of the specification, if the patentee or the applicant for the patent proves— (a) that the matter published was obtained from him, or (where he is not himself the true and first inventor) from any person from whom he derives title, and was published without his consent or the consent of any such person; and (b) where the patentee or the applicant for the patent or any person from whom he derives title learned of the publication before the date of the application for the patent, or, in the case of a convention application, before the date of the application for protection in a convention country, that the application or the application in the convention country, as the case may be, was made as soon as reasonably practicable thereafter:

3. Subs. by s. 25, ibid., for “Subject to the provisions of sub-section (5), where” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

Provided that this sub-section shall not apply if the invention was before the priority date of the claim commercially worked in India, otherwise than for the purpose of reasonable trial, either by the patentee or the applicant for the patent or any person from whom he derives title or by any other person with the consent of the patentee or the applicant for the patent or any person from whom he derives title.
(3) Where a complete specification is filed in pursuance of an application for a patent made by a person being the true and first inventor or deriving title from him, an invention claimed in that specification shall not be deemed to have been anticipated by reason only of any other application for a patent in respect of the same invention made in contravention of the rights of that person, or by reason only that after the date of filing of that other application the invention was used or published, without the consent of that person, by the applicant in respect of that other application or by any other person in consequence of any disclosure of any invention by that applicant.
30. Anticipation by previous communication to Government.—An invention claimed in a complete specification shall not be deemed to have been anticipated by reason only of the communication of the invention to the Government or to any person authorised by the Government to investigate the invention or its merits, or of anything done, in consequence of such a communication, for the purpose of the investigation.
31. Anticipation by public display, etc.—An invention claimed in a complete specification shall not be deemed to have been anticipated by reason only of— (a) the display of the invention with the consent of the true and first inventor or a person deriving title from him at an industrial or other exhibition to which the provisions of this section have been extended by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette, or the use thereof with his consent for the purpose of such an exhibition in the place where it is held; or (b) the publication of any description of the invention in consequence of the display or use of the invention at any such exhibition as aforesaid; or (c) the use of the invention, after it has been displayed or used at any such exhibition as aforesaid and during the period of the exhibition, by any person without the consent of the true and first inventor or a person deriving title from him; or (d) the description of the invention in a paper read by the true and first inventor before a learned society or published with his consent in the transactions of such a society, if the application for the patent is made by the true and first inventor or a person deriving title from him 1[not later than twelve months] after the opening of the exhibition or the reading or publication of the paper, as the case may be.
32. Anticipation by public working.—An invention claimed in a complete specification shall not be deemed to have been anticipated by reason only that at any time within one year before the priority date of the relevant claim of the specification, the invention was publicly worked in India— (a) by the patentee or applicant for the patent or any person from whom he derives title; or (b) by any other person with the consent of the patentee or applicant for the patent or any person from whom he derives title, if the working was effected for the purpose of reasonable trial only and if it was reasonably necessary, having regard to the nature of the invention, that the working for that purpose should be effected in public.
33. Anticipation by use and publication after provisional specification.—(1) Where a complete specification is filed or proceeded with in pursuance of an application which was accompanied by a provisional specification or where a complete specification filed along with an application is treated by virtue of a direction under sub-section (3) of section 9 as a provisional specification, then, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Controller shall not refuse to grant the patent, and the patent shall not be revoked or invalidated, by reason only that any matter described in the provisional specification or in the specification treated as aforesaid as a provisional specification was used in India or published in India or elsewhere at any time after the date of the filing of that specification.

1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 26, for “not later than six months” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

(2) Where a complete specification is filed in pursuance of a convention application, then, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Controller shall not refuse to grant the patent, and the patent shall not be revoked or invalidated, by reason only that any matter disclosed in any application for protection in a convention country upon which the convention application is founded was used in India or published in India or elsewhere at any time after the date of that application for protection.
34. No anticipation if circumstances are only as described in sections 29, 30, 31 and 32.—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Controller shall not refuse 1*** to grant a patent, and a patent shall not be revoked or invalidated by reason only of any circumstances which, by virtue of section 29 or section 30 or section 31 or section 32, do not constitute an anticipation of the invention claimed in the specification.
CHAPTER VII
PROVISIONS FOR SECRECY OF CERTAIN INVENTIONS
35. Secrecy directions relating to inventions relevant for defence purposes.—(1) Where, in respect of an application made before or after the commencement of this Act for a patent, it appears to the Controller that the invention is one of a class notified to him by the Central Government as relevant for defence purposes, or, where otherwise the invention appears to him to be so relevant, he may give directions for prohibiting or restricting the publication of information with respect to the invention or the communication of such information 2***.
(2) Where the Controller gives any such directions as are referred to in sub-section (1), he shall give notice of the application and of the directions to the Central Government, and the Central Government shall, upon receipt of such notice, consider whether the publication of the invention would be prejudicial to the defence of India, and if upon such consideration, it appears to it that the publication of the invention would not so prejudice, give notice to the Controller to that effect, who shall thereupon revoke the directions and notify the applicant accordingly.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), where the Central Government is of opinion that an invention in respect of which the Controller has not given any directions under sub-section (1), is relevant for defence purposes, it may at any time before 3[grant of patent] notify the Controller to that effect, and thereupon the provisions of that sub-section shall apply as if the invention were one of the class notified by the Central Government, and accordingly the Controller shall give notice to the Central Government of the directions issued by him.
36. Secrecy directions to be periodically reviewed.—4[(1) The question whether an invention in respect of which directions have been given under section 35 continues to be relevant for defence purposes shall be reconsidered by the Central Government at intervals of 5[six months] or on a request made by the applicant which is found to be reasonable by the Controller and if, on such reconsideration it appears to the Central Government that the publication of the invention would no longer be prejudicial to the defence of India or in case of an application filed by a foreign applicant it is found that the invention is published outside India it shall forthwith give notice to the Controller to revoke the direction and the Controllers shall thereupon revoke the directions previously given by him.] (2) The result of every re-consideration under sub-section (1), shall be communicated to the applicant within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed.
37. Consequences of secrecy directions.—(1) So long as any directions under section 35 are in force in respect of an application— (a) the Controller shall not pass an order refusing 6[to grant] the same; and

1. The words “to accept complete specification for a patent or” omitted by Act 15 of 2005, s. 27 (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
2. The words “to any person or class of persons specified in the directions” omitted by Act 38 of 2002, s. 19 (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).
3. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 28, for “acceptance of complete specification” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
5 Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 29, for “twelve months” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
6. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for “to accept” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

(b) notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no appeal shall lie from any order of the Controller passed in respect thereof:
1[Provided that the application may, subject to the directions, proceed up to the stage of grant of the patent, but the application and the specification found to be in order for grant of the patent shall not be published, and no patent shall be granted in pursuance of that application.] (2) Where a complete specification filed in pursuance of an application for a patent for an invention in respect of which directions have been given under section 35 2[is found to be in order for grant of the patent] during the continuance in force of the directions, then— (a) if, during the continuance in force of the directions, any use of the invention is made by or on behalf of, or to the order of the Government, the provisions of sections 100, 101 and 103 shall apply in relation to that use as if the patent had been granted for the invention ; and (b) if it appears to the Central Government that the applicant for the patent has suffered hardship by reason of the continuance in force of the directions, the Central Government may make to him such payment (if any) by way of solatium as appears to the Central Government to be reasonable having regard to the novelty and utility of the invention and the purpose for which it is designed, and to any other relevant circumstances.
(3) Where a patent is granted in pursuance of an application in respect of which directions have been given under section 35, no renewal fee shall be payable in respect of any period during which those directions were in force.
38. Revocation of secrecy directions and extension of time.—When any direction given under section 35 is revoked by the Controller, then, notwithstanding any provision of this Act specifying the time within which any step should be taken or any act done in connection with an application for the patent, the Controller may, subject to such conditions, if any, as he thinks fit to impose, extend the time for doing anything required or authorised to be done by or under this Act in connection with the application, whether or not that time has previously expired.
3[39. Residents not to apply for patents outside India without prior permission.—(1) No person resident in India shall, except under the authority of a written permit sought in the manner prescribed and granted by or on behalf of the Controller, make or cause to be made any application outside India for the grant of a patent for an invention unless— (a) an application for a patent for the same invention has been made in India, not less than six weeks before the application outside India; and (b) either no direction has been given under sub-section (1) of section 35 in relation to the application in India, or all such directions have been revoked.
(2) The Controller shall dispose of every such application within such period as may be prescribed:
Provided that if the invention is relevant for defence purpose or atomic energy, the Controller shall not grant permit without the prior consent of the Central Government.
(3) This section shall not apply in relation to an invention for which an application for protection has first been filed in a country outside India by a person resident outside India.]

1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 30, for the proviso (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
2. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for “is accepted” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
3. Subs by s. 31, ibid., for section 39 (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

40. Liability for contravention of section 35 or section 39.—Without prejudice to the provisions contained in Chapter XX, if in respect of an application for a patent any person contravenes any direction as to secrecy given by the Controller under section 35 1[or makes or causes to be made an application for grant of a patent outside India in contravention of section 39], or the application for patent under this Act shall be deemed to have been abandoned and the patent granted, if any, shall be liable to be revoked under section 64.
41. Finality of orders of Controller and Central Government.—All orders of the Controller giving directions as to secrecy as well as all orders of the Central Government under this Chapter shall be final and shall not be called in question in any court on any ground whatsoever.
42. Savings respecting disclosure to Government.—Nothing in this Act shall be held to prevent the disclosure by the Controller of information concerning an application for a patent or a specification filed in pursuance thereof to the Central Government for the purpose of the application or specification being examined for considering whether an order under this Chapter should be made or whether an order so made should be revoked.
CHAPTER VIII 2[GRANT OF PATENTS AND RIGHTS CONFERRED THEREBY] 3[43. Grant of patents.—(1) Where an application for a patent has been found to be in order for grant of the patent and either— (a) the application has not been refused by the Controller by virtue of any power vested in him by this Act; or (b) the application has not been found to be in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act, the patent shall be granted as expeditiously as possible to the applicant or, in the case of a joint application, to the applicants jointly, with the seal of the patent office and the date on which the patent is granted shall be entered in the register.
(2) On the grant of patent, the Controller shall publish the fact that the patent has been granted and thereupon the application, specification and other documents related thereto shall be open for public inspection.]
44. Amendment of patent granted to deceased applicant.—Where, at any time after a patent has been 4[granted] in pursuance of an application under this Act, the Controller is satisfied that the person to whom the patent was granted had died, or, in the case of a body corporate, had ceased to exist, before the patent was 4[granted], the Controller may amend the patent by substituting for the name of that person the name of the person to whom the patent ought to have been granted, and the patent shall have effect, and shall be deemed always to have had effect, accordingly.
45. Date of patent.—5[(1) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, every patent shall be dated as of the date on which the application for patent was filed.] (2) The date of every patent shall be entered in the register.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no suit or other proceeding shall be commenced or prosecuted in respect of an infringement committed before 6[the date of publication of the application].

2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 32, for Chapter Heading (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
3. Subs. by s. 33, ibid., for section 43 (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
4. Subs. by s. 34, ibid., for “sealed” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
5. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 24, for sub-section (1) (we.f. 20-5-2003).
6. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 35, for certain words (we.f. 1-1-2005).

46. Form, extent and effect of patent.—(1) Every patent shall be in the prescribed form and shall have effect throughout India.
(2) A patent shall be granted for one invention only:
Provided that it shall not be competent for any person in a suit or other proceeding to take any objection to a patent on the ground that it has been granted for more than one invention.
47. Grant of patents to be subject to certain conditions.—The grant of a patent under this Act shall be subject to the condition that— (1) any machine, apparatus or other article in respect of which the patent is granted or any article made by using a process in respect of which the patent is granted, may be imported or made by or on behalf of the Government for the purpose merely of its own use;
(2) any process in respect of which the patent is granted may be used by or on behalf of the Government for the purpose merely of its own use;
(3) any machine, apparatus or other article in respect of which the patent is granted or any article made by the use of the process in respect of which the patent is granted, may be made or used, and any process in respect of which the patent is granted may be used, by any person, for the purpose merely of experiment or research including the imparting of instructions to pupils; and (4) in the case of a patent in respect of any medicine or drug, the medicine or drug may be imported by the Government for the purpose merely of its own use or for distribution in any dispensary, hospital or other medical institution maintained by or on behalf of the Government or any other dispensary, hospital or other medical institution which the Central Government may, having regard to the public service that such dispensary, hospital or medical institution renders, specify in this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette.
1[48. Rights of patentees.—Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act and the conditions specified in section 47, a patent granted under this Act shall confer upon the patentee— (a) where the subject matter of the patent is a product, the exclusive right to prevent third parties, who do not have his consent, from the act of making, using, offering for sale, selling or importing for those purposes that product in India;
(b) where the subject matter of the patent is a process, the exclusive right to prevent third parties, who do not have his consent, from the act of using that process, and from the act of using, offering for sale, selling or importing for those purposes the product obtained directly by that process in India.
2*

*

*

*

*]
49. Patent rights not infringed when used on foreign vessels, etc., temporarily or accidentally in India.—(1) Where a vessel or aircraft registered in a foreign country or a land vehicle owned by a person ordinarily resident in such country comes into India (including the territorial waters thereof) temporarily or accidentally only, the rights conferred by a patent for an invention shall not be deemed to be infringed by the use of the invention— (a) in the body of the vessel or in the machinery, tackle, apparatus or other accessories thereof, so far as the invention is used on board the vessel and for its actual needs only; or (b) in the construction or working of the aircraft or land vehicle or of the accessories thereof, as the case may be.
(2) This section shall not extend to vessels, aircraft or land vehicles owned by persons ordinarily resident in a foreign country the laws of which do not confer corresponding rights with respect to the use of inventions in vessels, aircraft or land vehicles owned by persons ordinarily resident in India while in the ports or within the territorial waters of that foreign country or otherwise within the jurisdiction of its courts.

2. The proviso omitted by Act 15 of 2005, s. 36 (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

50. Rights of co-owners of patents.—(1) Where a patent is granted to two or more persons, each of those persons shall, unless an agreement to the contrary is in force, be entitled to an equal undivided share in the patent.
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in this section and in section 51, where two or more persons are registered as grantee or proprietor of a patent, then, unless an agreement to the contrary is in force, each of those persons shall be entitled, by himself or his agents, to 1[the rights conferred by section 48] for his own benefit without accounting to the other person or persons.
(3) Subject to the provisions contained in this section and in section 51 and to any agreement for the time being in force, where two or more persons are registered as grantee or proprietor of a patent, then, a licence under the patent shall not be granted and a share in the patent shall not be assigned by one of such persons except with the consent of the other person or persons.
(4) Where a patented article is sold by one of two or more persons registered as grantee or proprietor of a patent, the purchaser and any person claiming through him shall be entitled to deal with the article in the same manner as if the article had been sold by a sole patentee.
(5) Subject to the provisions contained in this section, the rules of law applicable to the ownership and devolution of movable property generally shall apply in relation to patents; and nothing contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall affect the mutual rights or obligations of trustees or of the legal representatives of a deceased person or their rights or obligations as such.
(6) Nothing in this section shall affect the rights of the assignees of a partial interest in a patent created before the commencement of this Act.
51. Power of Controller to give directions to co-owners.—(1) Where two or more persons are registered as grantee or proprietor of a patent, the Controller may, upon application made to him in the prescribed manner by any of those persons, give such directions in accordance with the application as to the sale or lease of the patent or any interest therein, the grant of licences under the patent, or the exercise of any right under section 50 in relation thereto, as he thinks fit.
(2) If any person registered as grantee or proprietor of a patent fails to execute any instrument or to do any other thing required for the carrying out of any direction given under this section within fourteen days after being requested in writing so to do by any of the other persons so registered, the Controller may, upon application made to him in the prescribed manner by any such other person, give directions empowering any person to execute that instrument or to do that thing in the name and on behalf of the person in default.
(3) Before giving any directions in pursuance of an application under this section, the Controller shall give an opportunity to be heard— (a) in the case of an application under sub-section (1), to the other person or persons registered as grantee or proprietor of the patent;
(b) in the case of an application under sub-section (2), to the person in default.
(4) No direction shall be given under this section so as to affect the mutual rights or obligation of trustees or of the legal representatives of a deceased person or of their rights or obligations as such, or which is inconsistent with the terms of any agreement between persons registered as grantee or proprietor of the patent.

1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 26, for “make, use, exercise and sell the patented invention” (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).

52. Grant of patent to true and first inventor where it has been obtained by another in fraud of him.—(1) 1[Where the patent has been revoked under section 64] on the ground that the patent was obtained wrongfully and in contravention of the rights of the petitioner or any person under or through whom he claims, or, where in a petition for revocation, the 2[ 3*** court], instead of revoking the patent, directs the complete specification to be amended by the exclusion of a claim or claims in consequence of a finding that the invention covered by such claim or claims had been obtained from the petitioner, the 2[ 3*** court] may, by order passed in the same proceeding, permit the grant to the petitioner of the whole or such part of the invention which the 2[ 3*** court] finds has been wrongfully obtained by the patentee, in lieu of the patent so revoked or is excluded by amendment.
(2) Where any such order is passed, the Controller shall, on request by the petitioner made in the prescribed manner grant to him:— (i) in cases where the 2[ 3*** court] permits the whole of the patent to be granted, a new patent bearing the same date and number as the patent revoked;
(ii) in cases where the 2[ 3*** court] permits a part only of the patent to be granted, a new patent for such part bearing the same date as the patent revoked and numbered in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Controller may, as a condition of such grant, require the petitioner to file a new and complete specification to the satisfaction of the Controller describing and claiming that part of the invention for which the patent is to be granted.
(3) No suit shall be brought for any infringement of a patent granted under this section committed before the actual date on which such patent was granted.
53. Term of patent.—4[(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the term of every patent granted, after the commencement of the Patents (Amendment) Act, 2002, and the term of every patent which has not expired and has not ceased to have effect, on the date of such commencement, under this Act, shall be twenty years from the date of filing of the application for the patent.] 5[Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the term of patent in case of International applications filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty designating India, shall be twenty years from the international filing date accorded under the Patent Cooperation Treaty.] (2) A patent shall cease to have effect notwithstanding anything therein or in this Act on the expiration of the period prescribed for the payment of any renewal fee, if that fee is not paid within the prescribed period 6[or within such extended period as may be prescribed].
7*

*

*

*

* 8[(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, on cessation of the patent right due to non-payment of renewal fee or on the expiry of the term of patent, the subject matter covered by the said patent shall not be entitled to any protection.]
CHAPTER IX
PATENTS OF ADDITION
54. Patents of addition.—(1) Subject to the provisions contained in this section, where an application is made for a patent in respect of any improvement in or modification of an invention described or disclosed in the complete specification filed therefor (in this Act referred to as the “main invention”) and the applicant also applies or has applied for a patent for that invention or is the patentee in respect thereof, the Controller may, if the applicant so requests, grant the patent for the improvement or modification as a patent of addition.

1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 37, for “Where a patent has been revoked” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
2. Subs. by s. 37, ibid., for “court” (w.e.f. 2-4-2007).
3. The word “Appellate Board” omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13 (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).
5. The Explanation ins. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 38 (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
6. Subs. by s. 38, ibid., for “or within that period as extended under this section” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

(2) Subject to the provisions contained in this section, where an invention, being an improvement in or modification of another invention, is the subject of an independent patent and the patentee in respect of that patent is also the patentee in respect of the patent for the main invention, the Controller may, if the patentee so requests, by order, revoke the patent for the improvement or modification and grant to the patentee a patent of addition in respect thereof, bearing the same date as the date of the patent so revoked.
(3) A patent shall not be granted as a patent of addition unless the date of filing of the 1[application] was the same as or later than the date of filing of the 1[application] in respect of the main invention.
2[(4) A patent of addition shall not be granted before grant of the patent for the main invention].
55. Term of patents of addition.—(1) A patent of addition shall be granted for a term equal to that of the patent for the main invention, or so much thereof as has not expired, and shall remain in force during that term or until the previous cesser of the patent for the main invention and no longer:
Provided that if the patent for the main invention is revoked under this Act, the court, or, as the case may be, the Controller, on request made to him by the patentee in the prescribed manner, may order that the patent of addition shall become an independent patent for the remainder of the term for the patent for the main invention and thereupon the patent shall continue in force as an independent patent accordingly.
(2) No renewal fees shall be payable in respect of a patent of addition, but, if any such patent becomes an independent patent under sub-section (1), the same fees shall thereafter be payable, upon the same dates, as if the patent had been originally granted as an independent patent.
56. Validity of patents of addition.—(1) The grant of a patent of addition shall not be refused, and a patent granted as a patent of addition shall not be revoked or invalidated, on the ground only that the invention claimed in the complete specification does not involve any inventive step having regard to any publication or use of— (a) the main invention described in the complete specification relating thereto; or (b) any improvement in or modification of the main invention described in the complete specification of a patent of addition to the patent for the main invention or of an application for such a patent of addition, and the validity of a patent of addition shall not be questioned on the ground that the invention ought to have been the subject of an independent patent.
(2) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that in determining the novelty of the invention claimed in the complete specification filed in pursuance of an application for a patent of addition regard shall be had also to the complete specification in which the main invention is described.
CHAPTER X
AMENDMENT OF APPLICATIONS AND SPECIFICATIONS
57. Amendment of application and specification before Controller.—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 59, the Controller may, upon application made under this section in the prescribed manner by an applicant for a patent or by a patentee, allow the application for the patent or the complete specification 3[or any document relating thereto] to be amended subject to such conditions, if any, as the Controller thinks fit:
Provided that the Controller shall not pass any order allowing or refusing an application to amend an application for a patent or a specification 3[or any document relating thereto] under this section while any suit before a court for the infringement of the patent or any proceeding before the High Court for the revocation of the patent is pending, whether the suit or proceeding commenced before or after the filing of the application to amend.
(2) Every application for leave to amend an application for a patent 4[or a complete specification or any document relating thereto] under this section shall state the nature of the proposed amendment, and shall give full particulars of the reasons for which the application is made.

1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 39, for “complete specification” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
4. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for “or a specification” (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).

1[(3) Any application for leave to amend an application for a patent or a complete specification or a document related thereto under this section made after the grant of patent and the nature of the proposed amendment may be published.] (4) Where an application is 2[published] under sub-section (3), any person interested may, within the prescribed period after the 3[publication] thereof, give notice to the Controller of opposition thereto; and where such a notice is given within the period aforesaid, the Controller shall notify the person by whom the application under this section is made and shall give to that person and to the opponent an opportunity to be heard before he decides the case.
(5) An amendment under this section of a complete specification may be, or include, an amendment of the priority date of a claim.
4[(6) The provisions of this section shall be without prejudice to the right of an applicant for a patent to amend his specification or any other document related thereto to comply with the directions of the Controller issued before the grant of a patent.] 5[58. Amendment of specification before Appellate Board or High Court.—(1) In any proceeding before the 6*** the High Court for the revocation of a patent, the 6*** the High Court, 7***, may, subject to the provisions contained in section 59, allow the patentee to amend his complete specification in such manner and subject to such terms as to costs, advertisement or otherwise, as the 6*** the High Court may think fit, and if in any proceedings for revocation the 6*** the High Court decides that the patent is invalid, it may allow the specification to be amended under this section instead of revoking the patent.
(2) Where an application for an order under this section is made to the 6*** the High Court, the applicant shall give notice of the application to the Controller, and the Controller shall be entitled to appear and be heard, and shall appear if so directed by the 6*** the High Court.
(3) Copies of all orders of the 6*** the High Court allowing the patentee to amend the specification shall be transmitted by the 6*** the High Court to the Controller who shall, on receipt thereof, cause an entry thereof and reference thereto to be made in the register.]
59. Supplementary provisions as to amendment of application or specification.—8[(1) No amendment of an application for a patent or a complete specification or any document relating thereto shall be made except by way of disclaimer, correction or explanation, and no amendment thereof shall be allowed, except for the purpose of incorporation of actual fact, and no amendment of a complete specification shall be allowed, the effect of which would be that the specification as amended would claim or describe matter not in substance disclosed or shown in the specification before the amendment, or that any claim of the specification as amended would not fall wholly within the scope of a claim of the specification before the amendment.] 9[(2) Where after the date of grant of patent any amendment of the specification or any other documents related thereto is allowed by the Controller or by 10*** the High Court, as the case may be,— (a) the amendment shall for all purposes be deemed to form part of the specification along with other documents related thereto;
(b) the fact that the specification or any other documents related thereto has been amended shall be published as expeditiously as possible; and

2. Subs. by s. 40, ibid., for “advertised” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
3. Subs. by s. 40, ibid., for “advertisement” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
4. Subs. by s. 40, ibid., for sub-section (6) (w.e.f 1-1-2005).
5. Subs. by s. 41, ibid., for section 58 (w.e.f. 2-4-2007).
6. The word “the Appellate Board” omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13 (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).
7. The words “as the case may be” omitted by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).
10. The words “the Appellate Board or” omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13 (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).

(c) the right of the applicant or patentee to make amendment shall not be called in question except on the ground of fraud].
(3) In construing the specification as amended, reference may be made to the specification as originally accepted.
CHAPTER XI
RESTORATION OF LAPSED PATENTS
60. Applications for restoration of lapsed patents.—(1) Where a patent has ceased to have effect by reason of failure to pay any renewal fee within the 1[period prescribed under section 53 or within such period as may be allowed under sub-section (4) of section 142], the patentee or his legal representative, and where the patent was held by two or more persons jointly, then, with the leave of the Controller, one or more of them without joining the others, may, within 2[eighteen months] from the date on which the patent ceased to have effect, make an application for the restoration of the patent.
3*

*

*

*

* (3) An application under this section shall contain a statement, verified in the prescribed manner, fully setting out the circumstances which led to the failure to pay the prescribed fee, and the Controller may require from the applicant such further evidence as he may think necessary.
61. Procedure for disposal of applications for restoration of lapsed patents.—(1) If, after hearing the applicant in cases where the applicant so desires or the Controller thinks fit, the Controller is prima facie satisfied that the failure to pay the renewal fee was unintentional and that there has been no undue delay in the making of the application, he shall 4[publish the application] in the prescribed manner; and within the prescribed period any person interested may give notice to the Controller of opposition thereto on either or both of the following grounds, that is to say,— (a) that the failure to pay the renewal fee was not unintentional; or (b) that there has been undue delay in the making of the application.
(2) If notice of opposition is given within the period aforesaid, the Controller shall notify the applicant, and shall give to him and to the opponent an opportunity to be heard before he decides the case.
(3) If no notice of opposition is given within the period aforesaid or if in the case of opposition, the decision of the Controller is in favour of the applicant, the Controller shall, upon payment of any unpaid renewal fee and such additional fee as may be prescribed, restore the patent and any patent of addition specified in the application which has ceased to have effect on the cesser of that patent.
(4) The Controller may, if he thinks fit as a condition of restoring the patent, require that an entry shall be made in the register of any document or matter which, under the provisions of this Act, has to be entered in the register but which has not been so entered.
62. Rights of patentees of lapsed patents which have been restored.—(1) Where a patent is restored, the rights of the patentee shall be subject to such provisions as may be prescribed and to such other provisions as the Controller thinks fit to impose for the protection or compensation of persons who may have begun to avail themselves of, or have taken definite steps by contract or otherwise to avail themselves of, the patented invention between the date when the patent ceased to have effect and the date of the 5[publication] of the application for restoration of the patent under this Chapter.

1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 43, for “prescribed period or within that period as extended under sub-section (3) of section 53” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 30, for “one year” (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).
4. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 44, for “advertise the application” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
5. Subs. by s. 45, ibid., for “advertisement” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

(2) No suit or other proceeding shall be commenced or prosecuted in respect of an infringement of a patent committed between the date on which the patent ceased to have effect and the 1[date of publication] of the application for restoration of the patent.
CHAPTER XII
SURRENDER AND REVOCATION OF PATENTS
63. Surrender of patents.—(1) A patentee may, at any time by giving notice in the prescribed manner to the Controller, offer to surrender his patent.
(2) Where such an offer is made, the Controller shall 2[publish] the offer in the prescribed manner, and also notify every person other than the patentee whose name appears in the register as having an interest in the patent.
(3) Any person interested may, within the prescribed period after 3[such publication] give notice to the Controller of opposition to the surrender, and where any such notice is given the Controller shall notify the patentee.
(4) If the Controller is satisfied after hearing the patentee and any opponent, if desirous of being heard, that the patent may properly be surrendered, he may accept the offer and, by order revoke the patent.
64. Revocation of Power patents.—(1) Subject to the provisions contained in this Act, a patent whether granted before or after the commencement of this Act, may, 4[be revoked on a petition of any person interested or of the Central Government 5*** or on a counter-claim in a suit for infringement of the patent by the High Court] on any of the following grounds, that is to say— (a) that the invention, so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification, was claimed in a valid claim of earlier priority date contained in the complete specification of another patent granted in India;
(b) that the patent was granted on the application of a person not entitled under the provisions of this Act to apply therefor:
6*

*

*

*

* (c) that the patent was obtained wrongfully in contravention of the rights of the petitioner or any person under or through whom he claims;
(d) that the subject of any claim of the complete specification is not an invention within the meaning of this Act;
(e) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is not new, having regard to what was publicly known or publicly used in India before the priority date of the claim or to what was published in India or elsewhere in any of the documents referred to in section 13:
6*

*

*

*

* (f) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is obvious or does not involve any inventive step, having regard to what was publicly known or publicly used in India or what was published in India or elsewhere before the priority date of the claim:
6*

*

*

*

* (g) that the invention, so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification, is not useful;

1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 45, for “date of the advertisement” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
2. Subs. by s. 46, ibid., for “advertise” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
3. Subs. by s. 46, ibid., for “such advertisement” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
5. The words “by the Appellate Board” omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13 (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).
6. The proviso omitted by Act 38 of 2002, s. 31 (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).

(h) that the complete specification does not sufficiently and fairly describe the invention and the method by which it is to be performed, that is to say, that the description of the method or the instructions for the working of the invention as contained in the complete specification are not by themselves sufficient to enable a person in India possessing average skill in, and average knowledge of, the art to which the invention relates, to work the invention, or that it does not disclose the best method of performing it which was known to the applicant for the patent and for which he was entitled to claim, protection;
(i) that the scope of any claim of the complete specification is not sufficiently and clearly defined or that any claim of the complete specification is not fairly based on the matter disclosed in the specification;
(j) that the patent was obtained on a false suggestion or representation;
(k) that the subject of any claim of the complete specification is not patentable under this Act;
(l) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification was secretly used in India, otherwise than as mentioned in sub-section (3), before the priority date of the claim;
(m) that the applicant for the patent has failed to disclose to the Controller the information required by section 8 or has furnished information which in any material particular was false to his knowledge;
(n) that the applicant contravened any direction for secrecy passed under section 35 1[or made or caused to be made an application for the grant of a patent outside India in contravention of section 39];
(o) that leave to amend the complete specification under section 57 or section 58 was obtained by fraud;
1[(p) that the complete specification does not disclose or wrongly mentions the source or geographical origin of biological material used for the invention;
(q) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification was anticipated having regard to the knowledge, oral or otherwise, available within any local or indigenous community in India or elsewhere.] (2) For the purposes of clauses (e) and (f) of sub-section (1),— (a) no account shall be taken of 2[personal document or secret trial or secret use]; and (b) where the patent is for a process or for a product as made by a process described or claimed the importation into India of the product made abroad by that process shall constitute knowledge or use in India of the invention on the date of the importation, except where such importation has been for the purpose of reasonable trial or experiment only.
(3) For the purpose of clause (l) of sub-section (1), no account shall be taken of any use of the invention— (a) for the purpose of reasonable trial or experiment only; or (b) by the Government or by any person authorised by the Government or by a Government undertaking, in consequence of the applicant for the patent or any person from whom he derives title having communicated or disclosed the invention directly or indirectly to the Government or person authorised as aforesaid or to the Government undertaking; or (c) by any other person, in consequence of the applicant for the patent or any person from whom he derives title having communicated or disclosed the invention, and without the consent or acquiescence of the applicant or of any person from whom he derives title.

2. Subs. by s. 31, ibid., for “secret use” (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).

(4) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), a patent may be revoked by the High Court on the petition of the Central Government, if the High Court is satisfied that the patentee has without reasonable cause failed to comply with the request of the Central Government to make, use or exercise the patented invention for the purposes of Government within the meaning of section 99 upon reasonable terms.
(5) A notice of any petition for revocation of a patent under this section shall be served on all persons appearing from the register to be proprietors of that patent or to have shares or interests therein and it shall not be necessary to serve a notice on any other person.
1[65. Revocation of patent or amendment of complete specification on directions from Government in cases relating to atomic energy.—(1) Where at any time after grant of a patent, the Central Government is satisfied that a patent is for an invention relating to atomic energy for which no patent can be granted under sub-section (1) of section 20 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 (33 of 1962), it may direct the Controller to revoke the patent, and thereupon the Controller, after giving notice, to the patentee and every other person whose name has been entered in the register as having an interest in the patent, and after giving them an opportunity of being heard, may revoke the patent.
(2) In any proceedings under sub-section (1), the Controller may allow the patentee to amend the complete specification in such manner as he considers necessary instead of revoking the patent.]
66. Revocation of patent in public interest.—Where the Central Government is of opinion that a patent or the mode in which it is exercised is mischievous to the State or generally prejudicial to the public, it may, after giving the patentee an opportunity to be heard, make a declaration to that effect in the Official Gazette and thereupon the patent shall be deemed to be revoked.
CHAPTER XIII
REGISTER OF PATENTS
67. Register of patents and particulars to be entered therein.—(1) There shall be kept at the patent office a register of patents, wherein shall be entered— (a) the names and addresses of grantees of patents;
(b) notifications of assignments and of transmissions of patents, of licences under patents, and of amendments, extensions, an revocations of patents; and (c) particulars of such other matters affecting the validity or proprietorship of patents as may be prescribed.
(2) No notice of any trust, whether express, implied or constructive, shall be entered in the register, and the Controller shall not be affected by any such notice.
(3) Subject to the superintendence and direction of the Central Government, the register shall be kept under the control and management of the Controller.
2[(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), it shall be lawful for the Controller to keep the register of patents or any part thereof in computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form subject to such safeguards as may be prescribed.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), a copy of, or extracts from, the register of patents, certified to be a true copy under the hand of the Controller or any officer duly authorised by the Controller in this behalf shall, in all legal proceedings, be admissible in evidence.
(6) In the event the register is kept wholly or partly in computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form,—

(a) reference in this Act to an entry in the register shall be deemed to include reference to a record of particulars kept in computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form and comprising the register or part of the register;
(b) references in this Act to particulars being registered or entered in the register shall be deemed to include references to the keeping of record of those particulars comprising the register or part of the register in computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form; and (c) references in this Act to the rectification of the register are to be read as including references to the rectification of the record of particulars kept in computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form and comprising the register or part of the register.] 1[68. Assignments, etc., not to be valid unless in writing and duly executed.—An assignment of a patent or of a share in a patent, a mortgage, licence or the creation of any other interest in a patent shall not be valid unless the same were in writing and the agreement between the parties concerned is reduced to the form of a document embodying all the terms and conditions governing their rights and obligations and duly executed.]
69. Registration of assignments, transmissions, etc.—(1) Where any person becomes entitled by assignment, transmission or operation of law to a patent or to a share in a patent or becomes entitled as a mortgagee, licensee or otherwise to any other interest in a patent, he shall apply in writing in the prescribed manner to the Controller for the registration of his title or, as the case may be, of notice of his interest in the register.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), an application for the registration of the title of any person becoming entitled by assignment to a patent or a share in a patent or becoming entitled by virtue of a mortgage, licence or other instrument to any other interest in a patent may be made in the prescribed manner by the assignor, mortgagor, licensor or other party to that instrument, as the case may be.
(3) Where an application is made under this section for the registration of the title of any person the Controller shall, upon proof of title to his satisfaction,— (a) where that person is entitled to a patent or a share in a patent, register him in the register as proprietor or co-proprietor of the patent, and enter in the register particulars of the instrument or event by which he derives title; or (b) where that person is entitled to any other interest in the patent, enter in the register notice of his interest, with particulars of the instrument, if any, creating it:
Provided that if there is any dispute between the parties whether the assignment, mortgage, licence, transmission, operation of law or any other such transaction has validly vested in such person a title to the patent or any share or interest therein, the Controller may refuse to take any action under clause (a) or, as the case may be, under clause (b), until the rights of the parties have been determined by a competent court.
(4) There shall be supplied to the Controller in the prescribed manner for being filed in the patent office copies of all agreements, licences and other documents affecting the title to any patent or any licence thereunder authenticated in the prescribed manner and also such other documents as may be prescribed relevant to the subject-matter:
Provided that in the case of a licence granted under a patent, the Controller shall, if so requested by the patentee or licensee, take steps for securing that the terms of the licence are not disclosed to any person except under the order of a court.
(5) Except for the purposes of an application under sub-section (1) or of an application to rectify the register, a document in respect of which no entry has been made in the register under sub-section (3) shall not be admitted by the Controller or by any court as evidence of the title of any person to a patent or to a share or interest therein unless the Controller or the court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, otherwise directs.

70. Power of registered grantee or proprietor to deal with patent.—Subject to the provisions contained in this Act relating to co-ownership of patents and subject also to any rights vested in any other person of which notice is entered in the register, the person or persons registered as grantee or proprietor of a patent shall have power to assign, grant licences under, or otherwise deal with, the patent and to give effectual receipts for any consideration for any such assignment, licence or dealing:
Provided that any equities in respect of the patent may be enforced in like manner as in respect of any other movable property.
71. Rectification of register by 1[High Court].—(1) The 1[High Court] may, on the application of any person aggrieved— (a) by the absence or omission from the register of any entry; or (b) by any entry made in the register without sufficient cause; or (c) by any entry wrongly remaining on the register; or (d) by any error or defect in any entry in the register, make such order for the making, variation or deletion, of any entry therein as it may think fit.
(2) In any proceeding under this section the 1[High Court] may decide any question that may be necessary or expedient to decide in connection with the rectification of the register.
(3) Notice of any application to the 1[High Court] under this section shall be given in the prescribed manner to the Controller who shall be entitled to appear and be heard on the application, and shall appear if so directed by the 2[High Court].
(4) Any order of the 1[High Court] under this section rectifying the register shall direct that notice of the rectification shall be served upon the Controller in the prescribed manner who shall upon receipt of such notice rectify the register accordingly.
72. Register to be open for inspection.—(1) Subject to the provisions contained in this Act and any rules made thereunder, the register shall at all convenient times be open to inspection by the public; and certified copies, sealed with the seal of the patent office, of any entry in the register shall be given to any person requiring them on payment of the prescribed fee.
(2) The register shall be prima facie evidence of any matters required or authorised by or under this Act to be entered therein.
3[(3) If the record of particulars is kept in computer floppies or diskettes or in any other electronic form, sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be deemed to have been complied with if the public is given access to such computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form or printouts of such record of particulars for inspection.]
CHAPTER XIV
PATENT OFFICE AND ITS ESTABLISHMENT
73. Controller and other officers.—(1) The Controller General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks appointed under sub-section (1) of 4[section 3 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 (47 of 1999)], shall be the Controller of Patents for the purposes of this Act.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government may appoint as many examiners and other officers and with such designations as it thinks fit.
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the officers appointed under sub-section (2) shall discharge under the superintendence and directions of the Controller such functions of the Controller under this Act as he may, from time to time by general or special order in writing, authorise them to discharge.

1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13, for “Appellate Board” (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).
2. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for “Board” (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).

(4) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (3), the Controller may, by order in writing and for reasons to be recorded therein withdraw any matter pending before an officer appointed under sub-section (2) and deal with such matter himself either de novo or from the stage it was so withdrawn or transfer the same to another officer appointed under sub-section (2) who may, subject to special directions in the order of transfer, proceed with the matter either de novo or from the stage it was so transferred.
74. Patent office and its branches.—(1) For the purposes of this Act, there shall be an office which shall be known as the patent office.
1[(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the name of the Patent Office.] (3) The head office of the patent office shall be at such place as the Central Government may specify, and for the purpose of facilitating, the registration of patents there may be established, at such other places as the Central Government may think fit, branch offices of the patent office.
(4) There shall be a seal of the patent office.
75. Restriction on employees of patent office as to right or interest in patents.—All officers and employees of the patents office shall be incapable, during the period for which they hold their appointments, to acquire or take, directly or indirectly, except by inheritance or bequest, any right or interest in any patent issued by that office.
76. Officers and employees not to furnish information, etc.—An officer or employee in the patent office shall not, except when required or authorised by this Act or under a direction in writing of the 2[Central Government 3***] or the Controller or by order of a court,— (a) furnish information on a matter which is being, or has been, or dealt with under this Act 4***;
(b) prepare or assist in the preparation of a document required or permitted by or under this Act 4*** to be lodged in the patent office; or (c) conduct a search in the records of the patent office.
CHAPTER XV
POWERS OF CONTROLLER GENERALLY
77. Controller to have certain powers of a civil court.—(1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the Controller in any proceedings before him under this Act shall have the powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of the following matters, namely:— (a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(e) awarding costs;
(f) reviewing his own decision on application made within the prescribed time and in the prescribed manner;
(g) setting aside an order passed ex parte on application made within the prescribed time and in the prescribed manner;
(h) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(2) Any order for costs awarded by the Controller in exercise of the powers conferred upon him under sub-section (1) shall be executable as a decree of a civil court.

2. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 36, for “Central Government” (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).
3. The words “or Appellate Board” omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13 (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).
4. The words and figures “or under the Indian Patents or Designs Act, 1911 (2 of 1911)” omitted by s. 36, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).

78. Powers of Controller to correct clerical errors, etc.—(1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sections 57 and 59 as regards amendment of applications for patents or complete specifications 1[or other documents relating thereto] and subject to the provisions of section 44, the Controller may, in accordance with the provisions of this section, correct any clerical error in any patent or in any specification or other document filed in pursuance of such application or in any application for a patent or any clerical error in any matter which is entered in the register.
(2) A correction may be made in pursuance of this section either upon a request in writing made by any person interested and accompanied by the prescribed fee, or without such a request.
(3) Where the Controller proposes to make any such correction as aforesaid otherwise than in pursuance of a request made under this section, he shall give notice of the proposal to the patentee or the applicant for the patent, as the case may be, and to any other person who appears to him to be concerned, and shall give them an opportunity to be heard before making the correction.
(4) Where a request is made under this section for the correction of any error in a patent or application for a patent or any document filed in pursuance of such an application, and it appears to the Controller that the correction would materially alter the meaning or scope of the document to which the request relates and ought not to be made without notice to persons affected thereby, he shall require notice of the nature of the proposed correction to be 2[published] in the prescribed manner.
(5) Within the prescribed time after any 3[such publication] as aforesaid any person interested may give notice to the Controller of opposition to the request, and, where such notice of opposition is given, the Controller shall give notice thereof to the person by whom the request was made, and shall give to him and to the opponent an opportunity to be heard before he decides the case.
79. Evidence how to be given and powers of Controller in respect thereof.—Subject to any rules made in this behalf, in any proceeding under this Act before the Controller, evidence shall be given by affidavit in the absence of directions by the Controller to the contrary, but in any case in which the Controller thinks it right so to do, he may take oral evidence in lieu of, or in addition to, evidence by affidavit, or may allow any party to be cross-examined on the contents of his affidavit.
80. Exercise of discretionary powers by Controller.—Without prejudice to any provision contained in this Act requiring the Controller to hear any party to the proceedings thereunder or to give any such party an opportunity to be heard, the Controller shall give to any applicant for a patent, or for amendment of a specification (if within the prescribed time the applicant so requires) an opportunity to be heard before exercising adversely to the applicant any discretion vested in the Controller by or under this Act:
4[Provided that the party desiring a hearing makes the request for such hearing to the Controller at least ten days in advance of the expiry of the time-limit specified in respect of the proceeding.]
81. Disposal by Controller of applications for extension of time.—Where under the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder the Controller may extend the time for doing any act, nothing in this Act shall be deemed to require him to give notice to or hear the party interested in opposing the extension, nor shall any appeal lie from any order of the Controller granting such extension.
5[CHAPTER XVI WORKING OF PATENTS, COMPULSORY LICENCES AND REVOCATION
82. Definition of “patented articles” and “patentee”.—In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,— (a) “patented article” includes any article made by a patented process; and (b) “patentee” includes an exclusive licensee.

2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 51, for “advertised” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
3. Subs. by s. 51, ibid., for “such advertisement” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
5. Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for Chapter XVI (sections 82 to 98) (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).

83. General principles applicable to working of patented inventions.—Without prejudice to the other provisions contained in this Act, in exercising the powers conferred by this Chapter, regard shall be had to the following general considerations, namely:— (a) that patents are granted to encourage inventions and to secure that the inventions are worked in India on a commercial scale and to the fullest extent that is reasonably practicable without undue delay;
(b) that they are not granted merely to enable patentees to enjoy a monopoly for the importation of the patented article;
(c) that the protection and enforcement of patent rights contribute to the promotion of technological innovation and to the transfer and dissemination of technology, to the mutual advantage of producers and users of technological knowledge and in a manner conducive to social and economic welfare, and to a balance of rights and obligations;
(d) that patents granted do not impede protection of public health and nutrition and should act as instrument to promote public interest specially in sectors of vital importance for socio-economic and technological development of India;
(e) that patents granted do not in any way prohibit Central Government in taking measures to protect public health;
(f) that the patent right is not abused by the patentee or person deriving title or interest on patent from the patentee, and the patentee or a person deriving title or interest on patent from the patentee does not resort to practices which unreasonably restrain trade or adversely affect the international transfer of technology; and (g) that patents are granted to make the benefit of the patented invention available at reasonably affordable prices to the public.
84. Compulsory licences.—(1) At any time after the expiration of three years from the date of the 1[grant] of patent, any person interested may make an application to the Controller for grant of compulsory licence on patent on any of the following grounds, namely:— (a) that the reasonable requirements of the public with respect to the patented invention have not been satisfied, or (b) that the patented invention is not available to the public at a reasonably affordable price, or (c) that the patented invention is not worked in the territory of India.
(2) An application under this section may be made by any person notwithstanding that he is already the holder of a licence under the patent and no person shall be estopped from alleging that the reasonable requirements of the public with respect to the patented invention are not satisfied or that the patented invention is not worked in the territory of India or that the patented invention is not available to the public at a reasonably affordable price by reason of any admission made by him, whether in such a licence or otherwise or by reason of his having accepted such a licence.
(3) Every application under sub-section (1) shall contain a statement setting out the nature of the applicant’s interest together with such particulars as may be prescribed and the facts upon which the application is based.
(4) The Controller, if satisfied that the reasonable requirements of the public with respect to the patented invention have not been satisfied or that the patented invention is not worked in the territory of India or that the patented invention is not available to the public at a reasonably affordable price, may grant a licence upon such terms as he may deem fit.
(5) Where the Controller directs the patentee to grant a licence he may, as incidental thereto, exercise the powers set out in section 88.

1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 52, for “sealing” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

(6) In considering the application filed under this section, the Controller shall take into account,— (i) the nature of the invention, the time which has elapsed since the sealing of the patent and the measures already taken by the patentee or any licensee to make full use of the invention;
(ii) the ability of the applicant to work the invention to the public advantage;
(iii) the capacity of the applicant to undertake the risk in providing capital and working the invention, if the application were granted;
(iv) as to whether the applicant has made efforts to obtain a licence from the patentee on reasonable terms and conditions and such efforts have not been successful within a reasonable period as the Controller may deem fit:
Provided that this clause shall not be applicable in case of national emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency or in case of public non-commercial use or on establishment of a ground of anti-competitive practices adopted by the patentee, but shall not be required to take into account matters subsequent to the making of the application.
1[Explanation.—For the purposes of clause (iv), “reasonable period” shall be construed as a period not ordinarily exceeding a period of six months.] (7) For the purposes of this Chapter, the reasonable requirements of the public shall be deemed not to have been satisfied— (a) if, by reason of the refusal of the patentee to grant a licence or licences on reasonable terms,— (i) an existing trade or industry or the development thereof or the establishment of any new trade or industry in India or the trade or industry of any person or class of persons trading or manufacturing in India is prejudiced; or (ii) the demand for the patented article has not been met to an adequate extent or on reasonable terms; or (iii) a market for export of the patented article manufactured in India is not being supplied or developed; or (iv) the establishment or development of commercial activities in India is prejudiced; or (b) if, by reason of conditions imposed by the patentee upon the grant of licences under the patent or upon the purchase, hire or use of the patented article or process, the manufacture, use or sale of materials not protected by the patent, or the establishment or development of any trade or industry in India, is prejudiced; or (c) if the patentee imposes a condition upon the grant of licences under the patent to provide exclusive grant back, prevention to challenges to the validity of patent or coercive package licensing, or (d) if the patented invention is not being worked in the territory of India on a commercial scale to an adequate extent or is not being so worked to the fullest extent that is reasonably practicable, or (e) if the working of the patented invention in the territory of India on a commercial scale is being prevented or hindered by the importation from abroad of the patented article by— (i) the patentee or persons claiming under him; or (ii) persons directly or indirectly purchasing from him; or (iii) other persons against whom the patentee is not taking or has not taken proceedings for infringement.

1. The Explanation ins. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 52 (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

85. Revocation of patents by the Controller for non-working.—(1) Where, in respect of a patent, a compulsory licence has been granted, the Central Government or any person interested may, after the expiration of two years from the date of the order granting the first compulsory licence, apply to the Controller for an order revoking the patent on the ground that the patented invention has not been worked in the territory of India or that reasonable requirements of the public with respect to the patented invention has not been satisfied or that the patented invention is not available to the public at a reasonably affordable price.
(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed, the facts upon which the application is based, and, in the case of an application other than by the Central Government, shall also set out the nature of the applicant’s interest.
(3) The Controller, if satisfied that the reasonable requirements of the public with respect to the patented invention have not been satisfied or that patented invention have not been worked in the territory of India or that the patented invention is not available to the public at a reasonably affordable price, may make an order revoking the patent.
(4) Every application under sub-section (1) shall ordinarily be decided within one year of its being presented to the Controller.
86. Power of Controller to adjourn applications for compulsory licences, etc., in certain cases.—(1) Where an application under section 84 or section 85, as the case may be, is made on the grounds that the patented invention has not been worked in the territory of India or on the ground mentioned in clause (d) of sub-section (7) of section 84 and the Controller is satisfied that the time which has elapsed since the sealing of the patent has for any reason been insufficient to enable the invention to be worked on a commercial scale to an adequate extent or to enable the invention to be so worked to the fullest extent that is reasonably practicable, he may, by order, adjourn the further hearing of the application for such period not exceeding twelve months in the aggregate as appears to him to be sufficient for the invention to be so worked:
Provided that in any case where the patentee establishes that the reason why a patented invention could not be worked as aforesaid before the date of the application was due to any State or Central Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder or any order of the Government imposed otherwise than by way of a condition for the working of the invention in the territory of India or for the disposal of the patented articles or of the articles made by the process or by the use of the patented plant, machinery, or apparatus, then, the period of adjournment ordered under this sub-section shall be reckoned from the date on which the period during which the working of the invention was prevented by such Act, rule or regulation or order of Government as computed from the date of the application, expires.
(2) No adjournment under sub-section (1) shall be ordered unless the Controller is satisfied that the patentee has taken with promptitude adequate or reasonable steps to start the working of the invention in the territory of India on a commercial scale and to an adequate extent.
87. Procedure for dealing with applications under sections 84 and 85.—(1) Where the Controller is satisfied, upon consideration of an application under section 84, or section 85, that a prima facie case has been made out for the making of an order, he shall direct the applicant to serve copies of the application upon the patentee and any other person appearing from the register to be interested in the patent in respect of which the application is made, and 1[shall publish the application in the official journal].
(2) The patentee or any other person desiring to oppose the application may within such time as may be prescribed or within such further time as the Controller may on application (made either before or after the expiration of the prescribed time) allow, give to the Controller notice of opposition.
(3) Any such notice of opposition shall contain a statement setting out the grounds on which the application is opposed.

1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 53, for “shall advertise the application in the Official Gazette” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

(4) Where any such notice of opposition is duly given, the Controller shall notify the applicant, and shall give to the applicant and the opponent an opportunity to be heard before deciding the case.
88. Powers of Controller in granting compulsory licences.—(1) Where the Controller is satisfied on an application made under section 84 that the manufacture, use or sale of materials not protected by the patent is prejudiced by reason of conditions imposed by the patentee upon the grant of licences under the patent, or upon the purchase, hire or use of the patented article or process, he may, subject to the provisions of that section, order the grant of licences under the patent to such customers of the applicant as he thinks fit as well as to the applicant.
(2) Where an application under section 84 is made by a person being the holder of a licence under the patent, the Controller may, if he makes an order for the grant of a licence to the applicant, order the existing licence to be cancelled, or may, if he thinks fit, instead of making an order for the grant of a licence to the applicant, order the existing licence to be amended.
(3) Where two or more patents are held by the same patentee and an applicant for a compulsory licence establishes that the reasonable requirements of the public have not been satisfied with respect to some only of the said patents, then, if the Controller is satisfied that the applicant cannot efficiently or satisfactorily work the licence granted to him under those patents without infringing the other patents held by the patentee and if those patents involve important technical advancement or considerable economic significance in relation to the other patents, he may, by order, direct the grant of a licence in respect of the other patents also to enable the licensee to work the patent or patents in regard to which a licence is granted under section 84.
(4) Where the terms and conditions of a licence have been settled by the Controller, the licensee may, at any time after he has worked the invention on a commercial scale for a period of not less than twelve months, make an application to the Controller for the revision of the terms and conditions on the ground that the terms and conditions settled have proved to be more onerous than originally expected and that in consequence thereof the licensee is unable to work the invention except at a loss:
Provided that no such application shall be entertained a second time.
89. General purposes for granting compulsory licences.—The powers of the Controller upon an application made under section 84 shall be exercised with a view to securing the following general purposes, that is to say,— (a) that patented inventions are worked on a commercial scale in the territory of India without undue delay and to the fullest extent that is reasonably practicable;
(b) that the interests of any person for the time being working or developing an invention in the territory of India under the protection of a patent are not unfairly prejudiced.
90. Terms and conditions of compulsory licences.—(1) In settling the terms and conditions of a licence under section 84, the Controller shall endeavour to secure— (i) that the royalty and other remuneration, if any, reserved to the patentee or other person beneficially entitled to the patent, is reasonable, having regard to the nature of the invention, the expenditure incurred by the patentee in making the invention or in developing it and obtaining a patent and keeping it in force and other relevant factors;
(ii) that the patented invention is worked to the fullest extent by the person to whom the licence is granted and with reasonable profit to him;
(iii) that the patented articles are made available to the public at reasonably affordable prices;
(iv) that the licence granted is a non-exclusive licence;
(v) that the right of the licensee is non-assignable;
(vi) that the licence is for the balance term of the patent unless a shorter term is consistent with public interest;

1[(vii) that the licence is granted with a predominant purpose of supply in the Indian market and that the licensee may also export the patented product, if need be in accordance with the provisions of sub-clause (iii) of clause (a) of sub-section (7) of section 84;
(viii) that in the case of semi-conductor technology, the licence granted is to work the invention for public non-commercial use;
(ix) that in case the licence is granted to remedy a practice determined after judicial or administrative process to be anti-competitive, the licensee shall be permitted to export the patented product, if need be.] (2) No licence granted by the Controller shall authorise the licensee to import the patented article or an article or substance made by a patented process from abroad where such importation would, but for such authorisation, constitute an infringement of the rights of the patentee.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the Central Government may, if in its opinion it is necessary so to do, in the public interest, direct the Controller at any time to authorise any licensee in respect of a patent to import the patented article or an article or substance made by a patented process from abroad (subject to such conditions as it considers necessary to impose relating among other matters to the royalty and other remuneration, if any, payable to the patentee, the quantum of import, the sale price of the imported article and the period of importation), and thereupon the Controller shall give effect to the directions.
91. Licensing of related patents.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the other provisions of this Chapter, at any time after the sealing of a patent, any person who has the right to work any other patented invention either as patentee or as licensee thereof, exclusive or otherwise, may apply to the Controller for the grant of a licence of the first-mentioned patent on the ground that he is prevented or hindered without such licence from working the other invention efficiently or to the best advantage possible.
(2) No order under sub-section (1) shall be made unless the Controller is satisfied— (i) that the applicant is able and willing to grant, or procure the grant to the patentee and his licensees if they so desire, of a licence in respect of the other invention on reasonable terms; and (ii) that the other invention has made a substantial contribution to the establishment or development of commercial or industrial activities in the territory of India.
(3) When the Controller is satisfied that the conditions mentioned in sub-section (1) have been established by the applicant, he may make an order on such terms as he thinks fit granting a licence under the first-mentioned patent and a similar order under the other patent if so requested by the proprietor of the first-mentioned patent or his licensee:
Provided that the licence granted by the Controller shall be non-assignable except with the assignment of the respective patents.
(4) The provisions of sections 87, 88, 89 and 90 shall apply to licences granted under this section as they apply to licences granted under section 84.
92. Special provision for compulsory licences on notifications by Central Government.—(1) If the Central Government is satisfied, in respect of any patent in force in circumstances of national emergency or in circumstances of extreme urgency or in case of public non-commercial use, that it is necessary that compulsory licences should be granted at any time after the sealing thereof to work the invention, it may make a declaration to that effect, by notification in the Official Gazette, and thereupon the following provisions shall have effect, that is to say,— (i) the Controller shall, on application made at any time after the notification by any person interested, grant to the applicant a licence under the patent on such terms and conditions as he thinks fit;

1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 54, for clause (vii) (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

(ii) in settling the terms and conditions of a licence granted under this section, the Controller shall endeavour to secure that the articles manufactured under the patent shall be available to the public at the lowest prices consistent with the patentees deriving a reasonable advantage from their patent rights.
(2) The provisions of sections 83, 87, 88, 89 and 90 shall apply in relation to the grant of licences under this section as they apply in relation to the grant of licences under section 84.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), where the Controller is satisfied on consideration of the application referred to in clause (i) of sub-section (1) that it is necessary in— (i) a circumstance of national emergency; or (ii) a circumstance of extreme urgency; or (iii) a case of public non-commercial use, which may arise or is required, as the case may be, including public health crises, relating to Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome, human immunodeficiency virus, tuberculosis, malaria or other epidemics, he shall not apply any procedure specified in section 87 in relation to that application for grant of licence under this section:
Provided that the Controller shall, as soon as may be practicable, inform the patentee of the patent relating to the application for such non-application of section 87.
1[92A. Compulsory licence for export of patented pharmaceutical products in certain exceptional circumstances.—(1) Compulsory licence shall be available for manufacture and export of patented pharmaceutical products to any country having insufficient or no manufacturing capacity in the pharmaceutical sector for the concerned product to address public health problems, provided compulsory licence has been granted by such country or such country has, by notification or otherwise, allowed importation of the patented pharmaceutical products from India.
(2) The Controller shall, on receipt of an application in the prescribed manner, grant a compulsory licence solely for manufacture and export of the concerned pharmaceutical product to such country under such terms and conditions as may be specified and published by him.
(3) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be without prejudice to the extent to which pharmaceutical products produced under a compulsory licence can be exported under any other provision of this Act.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “pharmaceutical products” means any patented product, or product manufactured through a patented process, of the pharmaceutical sector needed to address public health problems and shall be inclusive of ingredients necessary for their manufacture and diagnostic kits required for their use.]
93. Order for licence to operate as a deed between parties concerned.—Any order for the grant of a licence under this Chapter shall operate as if it were a deed granting a licence executed by the patentee and all other necessary parties embodying the terms and conditions, if any, settled by the Controller.
94. Termination of compulsory licence.—(1) On an application made by the patentee or any other person deriving title or interest in the patent, a compulsory licence granted under section 84 may be terminated by the Controller, if and when the circumstances that gave rise to the grant thereof no longer exist and such circumstances are unlikely to recur:
Provided that the holder of the compulsory licence shall have the right to object to such termination.
(2) While considering an application under sub-section (1), the Controller shall take into account that the interest of the person who had previously been granted the licence is not unduly prejudiced.].

CHAPTER XVII
USE OF INVENTIONS FOR PURPOSES OF GOVERNMENT AND ACQUISITION OF INVENTIONS BY CENTRAL
GOVERNMENT
99. Meaning of use of invention for purposes of Government.—(1) For the purposes of this Chapter, an invention is said to be used for the purposes of Government if it is made, used, exercised or vended for the purposes of the Central Government, a State Government or a Government undertaking.
1*

*

*

*

* (3) Nothing contained in this Chapter shall apply in respect of any such importation making or using of any machine, apparatus or other article or of any such using of any process or of any such importation, using or distribution of any medicine or drug, as may be made by virtue of one or more of the conditions specified in section 47.
100.
Power of Central Government to use inventions for purposes of Government.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, at any time after an application for a patent has been filed at the patent office or a patent has been granted, the Central Government and any person authorised in writing by it, may use the invention for the purposes of Government in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
(2) Where an invention has, before the priority date of the relevant claim of the complete specification, been duly recorded in a document, or tested or tried, by or on behalf of the Government or a Government undertaking, otherwise than in consequence of the communication of the invention directly or indirectly by the patentee or by a person from whom he derives title, any use of the invention by the Central Government or any person authorised in writing by it for the purposes of Government may be made free of any royalty or other remuneration to the patentee.
(3) If and so far as the invention has not been so recorded or tried or tested as aforesaid, any use of the invention made by the Central Government or any person authorised by it under sub-section (1), at any time after 2[grant of the patent] or in consequence of any such communication as aforesaid, shall be made upon terms as may be agreed upon either before or after the use, between the Central Government or any person authorised under sub-section (1) and the patentee, or, as may in default of agreement be determined by the High Court on a reference under section 103:
3[Provided that in case of any such use of any patent, the patentee shall be paid not more than adequate remuneration in the circumstances of each case, taking into account the economic value of the use of the patent.] (4) The authorisation by the Central Government in respect of an invention may be given under this section, either before or after the patent is granted and either before or after the acts in respect of which such authorisation is given or done, and may be given to any person, whether or not he is authorised directly or indirectly by the applicant or the patentee to make, use, exercise or vend the invention or import the machine, apparatus or other article or medicine or drug covered by such patent.
(5) Where an invention has been used by or with the authority of the Central Government for the purposes of Government under this section, then, 4[except in case of national emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency or for non-commercial use], the Government shall notify the patentee as soon as practicable of the fact and furnish him with such information as to the extent of the use of the invention as he may, from time to time, reasonable require; and where the invention has been used for the purposes of a Government undertaking, the Central Government may call for such information as may be necessary for this purpose from such undertaking.

2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 56, for “the acceptance of the complete specification in respect of the patent” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
3. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 41, for the proviso (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).

(6) The right to make, use, exercise and vend an invention for the purposes of Government under sub-section (1) shall include the 1[right to sell, on non-commercial basis, the goods] which have been made in exercise of that right, and a purchaser of goods so sold, and a person claiming through him, shall have the power to deal with the goods as if the Central Government or the person authorised under sub-section (1) were the patentee of the invention.
(7) Where in respect of a patent which has been the subject of an authorisation under this section, there is an exclusive licensee as is referred to in sub-section (3) of section 101, or where such patent has been assigned to the patentee in consideration of royalties or other benefits determined by reference to the use of the invention (including payments by way of minimum royalty), the notice directed to be given under sub-section (5) shall also be given to such exclusive licensee or assignor as the case may be, and the reference to the patentee in sub-section (3) shall be deemed to include a reference to such assignor or exclusive licensee.
101. Rights of third parties in respect of use of invention for purposes of Government.—(1) In relation to any use of a patented invention, or an invention in respect of which an application for a patent is pending, made for the purposes of Government— (a) by the Central Government or any person authorised by the Central Government under section 100; or (b) by the patentee or applicant for the patent to the order made by the Central Government, the provisions of any licence, assignment or agreement granted or made, 2*** between the patentee or applicant for the patent (or any person who derives title from him or from whom he derives title) and any person other than the Central Government shall be of no effect so far as those provisions— (i) restrict or regulate the use for the purposes of Government of the invention, or of any model, document or information relating thereto, or (ii) provide for the making of payments in respect of any use of the invention or of the model, document or information relating thereto for the purposes of Government 3***, and the reproduction or publication of any model or document in connection with the said use for the purposes of Government shall not be deemed to be an infringement of any copyright subsisting in the model or document.
(2) Where the patent, or the right to apply for or obtain the patent, has been assigned to the patentee in consideration of royalties or other benefits determined by reference to the use of the invention 2***, then, in relation to any use of the invention made for the purposes of Government by the patentee to the order of the Central Government, sub-section (3) of section 100 shall have effect as if that use were made by the virtue of an authority given under that section; and any rise of the invention for the purposes of Government by virtue of sub-section (3) of that section shall have effect as if the reference to the patentee included a reference to the assignor of the patent, and any sum payable by virtue of that sub-section shall be divided between the patentee and the assignor in such proportion as may be agreed upon between them or as may in default of agreement be determined by the High Court on a reference under section 103.
(3) Where by virtue of sub-section (3) of section 100, payments are required to be made by the Central Government or persons authorised under sub-section (2) of that section in respect of the use of an invention for the purposes of Government and where in respect of such patent there is an exclusive licensee authorised under his licence to use the invention for the purposes of Government, such sum shall be shared by the patentee and such licensee in such proportions, if any, as may be agreed upon between them or as may in default of agreement be determined by the High Court on a reference under section 103 to be just, having regard to any expenditure incurred by the licensee—

1. Subs. by s. 41, ibid., for “right to sell the goods” (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).
2. The words “, whether before or after the commencement of this Act,” omitted by Act 38 of 2002, s. 42 (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).
3. The brackets and words “(including payments by way of minimum royalty)” omitted by s. 42, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).

(a) in developing the said invention; or (b) in making payments to the patentees other than royalties or other benefits determined by reference to the use of the invention 1*** in consideration of the licence.
102. Acquisition of inventions and patents by the Central Government.—(1) The Central Government may, if satisfied that it is necessary that an invention which is the subject of an application for a patent or a patent should be acquired from the applicant or the patentee for a public purpose, publish a notification to that effect in the Official Gazette, and thereupon the invention or patent and all rights in respect of the invention or patent shall, by force of this section, stand transferred to and be vested in the Central Government.
(2) Notice of the acquisition shall be given to the applicant, and, where a patent has been granted, to the patentee and other persons, if any, appearing in the register as having an interest in the patent.
(3) The Central Government shall pay to the applicant, or, as the case may be, the patentee and other persons appearing on the register as having an interest in the patent such compensation as may be agreed upon between the Central Government and the applicant, or the patentee and other persons; or, as may, in default of agreement, be determined by the High Court on a reference under section 103 to be just having regard to the expenditure incurred in connection with the invention and, in the case of a patent, the term thereof, the period during which and the manner in which it has already been worked (including the profits made during such period by the patentee or by his licensee whether exclusive or otherwise) and other relevant factors.
103. Reference to High Court of disputes as to use for purposes of Government.—(1) Any dispute as to the exercise by the Central Government or a person authorised by it of the powers conferred by section 100, or as to terms for the use of an invention for the purposes of Government thereunder or as to the right of any person to receive any part of a payment made in pursuance of sub-section (3) of that section or as to the amount of compensation payable for the acquisition of an invention or a patent under section 102, may be referred to the High Court by either party to the dispute in such manner as may be prescribed by the rules of the High Court.
(2) In any proceeding under this section to which the Central Government is a party, the Central Government may,— (a) if the patentee is a party to the proceedings, petition by way of counter-claim for revocation of the patent on any ground upon which a patent may be revoked under section 64; and (b) whether a patentee is or is not a party to the proceedings, put in issue the validity of the patent without petitioning for its revocation.
(3) If in such proceedings as aforesaid any question arises whether an invention has been recorded, tested or tried as is mentioned in section 100, and the disclosure of any document regarding the invention, or of any evidence of the test or trial thereof, would, in the opinion of the Central Government, be prejudicial to the public interest, the disclosure may be made confidentially to the advocate of the other party or to an independent expert mutually agreed upon.
(4) In determining under this section any dispute between the Central Government and any person as to terms for the use of an invention for the purposes of Government, the High Court shall have regard to any benefit or compensation which that person or any person from whom he derive title, may have received, or may be entitled to receive, directly or indirectly in respect of the use of the invention in question for the purposes of Government.
(5) In any proceedings under this section, the High Court may at any time order the whole proceedings or any question or issue of fact arising therein to be referred to an official referee, commissioner or an arbitrator on such terms as the High Court may direct, and references to the High Court in the foregoing provisions of this section shall be construed accordingly.
(6) Where the invention claimed in a patent was made by a person who at the time it was made was in the service of the Central Government or of a State Government or was an employee of a Government

1. The words “including payments by way of minimum royalty” omitted by Act 38 of 2002, s. 42 (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).

undertaking and the subject-matter of the invention is certified by the relevant Government or the principal officer of the Government undertaking to be connected with the work done in the course of the normal duties of the Government servant or employee of the Government undertaking, then, notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any dispute of the nature referred to in sub-section (1) relating to the invention shall be disposed of by the Central Government conformably to the provisions of this section so far as may be applicable, but before doing so the Central Government shall give an opportunity to the patentee and such other parties as it considers have an interest in the matter to be heard.
CHAPTER XVIII
SUITS CONCERNING INFRINGEMENT OF PATENTS
104. Jurisdiction.—No suit for a declaration under section 105 or for any relief under section 106 or for infringement of a patent shall be instituted in any court inferior to a district court having jurisdiction to try the suit:
Provided that where a counter-claim for revocation of the patent is made by the defendant, the suit, along with the counter-claim, shall be transferred to the High Court for decision.
1[104A. Burden of proof in case of suits concerning infringement.—(1) In any suit for infringement of a patent, where the subject matter of patent is a process for obtaining a product, the court may direct the defendant to prove that the process used by him to obtain the product, identical to the product of the patented process, is different from the patented process if,— (a) the subject matter of the patent is a process for obtaining a new product; or (b) there is a substantial likelihood that the identical product is made by the process, and the patentee or a person deriving title or interest in the patent from him, has been unable through reasonable efforts to determine the process actually used:
Provided that the patentee or a person deriving title or interest in the patent from him, first proves that the product is identical to the product directly obtained by the patented process.
(2) In considering whether a party has discharged the burden imposed upon him by sub-section (1), the court shall not require him to disclose any manufacturing or commercial secrets, if it appears to the court that it would be unreasonable to do so.]
105. Power of court to make declaration as to non-infringement.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 34 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 (47 of 1963), any person may institute a suit for a declaration that the use by him of any process, or the making, use or sale of any article by him does not, or would not, constitute an infringement of a claim of a patent against the patentee or the holder of an exclusive licence under the patent, notwithstanding that no assertion to the contrary has been made by the patentee or the licensee, if it is shown— (a) that the plaintiff has applied in writing to the patentee or exclusive licensee for a written acknowledgment to the effect of the declaration claimed and has furnished him with full particulars in writing of the process or article in question; and (b) that the patentee or licensee has refused or neglected to give such an acknowledgment.
(2) The costs of all parties in a suit for a declaration brought by virtue of this section shall, unless for special reasons the court thinks fit to order otherwise, be paid by the plaintiff.
(3) The validity of a claim of the specification of a patent shall not be called in question in a suit for a declaration brought by virtue of this section, and accordingly the making or refusal of such a declaration in the case of a patent shall not be deemed to imply that the patent is valid or invalid.
(4) A suit for a declaration may be brought by virtue of this section at any time 2[after the publication of grant of a patent], and references in this section to the patentee shall be construed accordingly.

2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 57, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

106. Power of court to grant relief in cases of groundless threats of infringement proceedings.— (1) Where any person (whether entitled to or interested in a patent or an application for a patent or not) threatens any other person by circulars or advertisements or by communications, oral or in writing addressed to that or any other person, with proceedings for infringement of a patent, any person aggrieved thereby may bring a suit against him praying for the following reliefs, that is to say— (a) a declaration to the effect that the threats are unjustifiable;
(b) an injunction against the continuance of the threats; and (c) such damages, if any, as he has sustained thereby.
(2) Unless in such suit the defendant proves that the acts in respect of which the proceedings were threatened constitute or, if done, would constitute, an infringement of a patent or of rights arising from the publication of a complete specification in respect of a claim of the specification not shown by the plaintiff to be invalid, the court may grant to the plaintiff all or any of the reliefs prayed for.
Explanation.—A mere notification of the 1[existence] of a patent does not constitute a threat of proceeding within the meaning of this section.
107. Defences, etc., in suit for infringement.—(1) In any suit for infringement of a patent, every ground on which it may be revoked under section 64 shall be available as a ground for defence.
(2) In any suit for infringement of a patent by the making, using or importation of any machine, apparatus or other article or by the using of any process or by the importation, use or distribution of any medicine or drug, it shall be a ground for defence that such making, using, importation or distribution is in accordance with any one or more of the conditions specified in section 47.
2[107A. Certain acts not to be considered as infringement.—For the purposes of this Act,— (a) any act of making, constructing, 3[using, selling or importing] a patented invention solely for uses reasonably related to the development and submission of information required under any law for the time being in force, in India, or in a country other than India, that regulates the manufacture, construction, 4[use, sale or import] of any product;
(b) importation of patented products by any person from a person 5[who is duly authorised under the law to produce and sell or distribute the product], shall not be considered as an infringement of patent rights.]
108. Reliefs in suits for infringement.—6[(1)] The reliefs which a court may grant in any suit for infringement include an injunction (subject to such terms, if any, as the court thinks fit) and, at the option of the plaintiff, either damages or an account of profits.
7[(2) The court may also order that the goods which are found to be infringing and materials and implement, the predominant use of which is in the creation of infringing goods shall be seized, forfeited or destroyed, as the court deems fit under the circumstances of the case without payment of any compensation.]
109. Right of exclusive licensee to take proceedings against infringement.—(1) The holder of an exclusive licence shall have the like right as the patentee to institute a suit in respect of any infringement of the patent committed after the date of the licence, and in awarding damages or an account of profits or granting any other relief in any such suit the court shall take into consideration any loss suffered or likely to be suffered by the exclusive licensee as such or, as the case may be, the profits earned by means of the infringement so far as it constitutes an infringement of the rights of the exclusive licensee as such.

1. Subs. by Act 56 of 1974, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “existing” (w.e.f. 20-12-1974).
2. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 44 (w.e.f 20-5-2003).
3. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 58, for “using or selling” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
4. Subs. by s. 58, ibid., for “use or sale” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
5. Subs. by s. 58, ibid., for “who is duly authorised by the patentee to sell or distribute the product” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
6. Section 108 renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof by Act 38 of 2002, s. 45 (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).

(2) In any suit for infringement of a patent by the holder of an exclusive licence under sub-section (1), the patentee shall, unless he has joined as a plaintiff in the suit, be added as a defendant, but a patentee so added as defendant shall not be liable for any costs unless he enters an appearance and takes part in the proceedings.
110. Right of licensee under section 84 to take proceedings against infringement.—Any person to whom a licence has been granted under section 84 shall be entitled to call upon the patentee to take proceedings to prevent any infringement of the patent, and, if the patentee refuses or neglects to do so within two months after being so called upon, the licensee may institute proceedings for the infringement in his own name as though he were the patentee, making the patentee a defendant; but a patentee so added as defendant shall not be liable for any costs unless he enters an appearance and takes part in the proceedings.
111. Restriction on power of court to grant damages or account of profits for infringement.—(1) In a suit for infringement of a patent, damages or an account of profits shall not be granted against the defendant who proves that at the date of the infringement he was not aware and had no reasonable grounds for believing that the patent existed.
Explanation.—A person shall not be deemed to have been aware or to have had reasonable grounds for believing that a patent exists by reason only of the application to an article of the word “patent”, “patented” or any word or words expressing or implying that a patent has been obtained for the article, unless the number of the patent accompanies the word or words in question.
(2) In any suit for infringement of a patent the court may, if it thinks fit, refuse to grant any damages or an account of profits in respect of any infringement committed after a failure to pay any renewal fee within the prescribed period and before any extension of that period.
(3) Where an amendment of a specification by way of disclaimer, correction or explanation has been allowed under this Act after the publication of the specification, no damages or account of profits shall be granted in any proceedings in respect of the use of the invention before the date of the decision allowing the amendment, unless the court is satisfied that the specification as originally published was framed in good faith and with reasonable skill and knowledge.
(4) Nothing in this section shall affect the power of the court to grant an injunction in any suit for infringement of a patent.
112. [Restriction on power of court to grant injunction in certain cases.]—Omitted by The Patents (Amendment) Act, 2002 (38 of 2002), s. 46 (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).
113. Certificate of validity of specification and costs of subsequent suits for infringement thereof.—1[(1) If in any proceedings before 2*** a High Court for the revocation of a patent under section 64 and section 104, 3***, the validity of any claim of a specification is contested and that claim is found by 2*** the High Court to be valid, 2*** the High Court may certify that the validity of that claim was contested in those proceedings and was upheld].
(2) Where any such certificate has been granted, then, if in any subsequent suit before a court for infringement of that claim of the patent or in any subsequent proceeding for revocation of the patent in so far as it relates to that claim, the patentee or other person relying on the validity of the claim obtains a final order or judgment in his favour, he shall be entitled to an order for the payment of his full costs, charges and expenses of an incidental to any such suit or proceeding properly incurred so far as they concern the claim in respect of which the certificate was granted, unless the court trying the suit or proceeding otherwise directs:
Provided that the costs as specified in this sub-section shall not be ordered when the party disputing the validity of the claim satisfies the court that he was not aware of the grant of the certificate when he raised the dispute and withdrew forthwith such defence when he became aware of such a certificate.

2. The words “the Appellate Board or” omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13 (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).
3. The words “as the case may be” omitted by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).

1[(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as authorising the courts 2*** hearing appeals from decrees or orders in suits for infringement or petitions for revocation, as the case may be, to pass orders for costs on the scale referred to therein].
114. Relief for infringement of partially valid specification.—(1) If in proceedings for infringement of a patent it is found that any claim of the specification, being a claim in respect of which infringement is alleged, is valid, but that any other claim is invalid, the court may grant relief in respect of any valid claim which is infringed:
Provided that the court shall not grant relief except by way of injunction save in the circumstances mentioned in sub-section (2).
(2) Where the plaintiff proves that the invalid claim was framed in good faith and with reasonable skill and knowledge, the court shall grant relief in respect of any valid claim which is infringed subject to the discretion of the court as to costs and as to the date from which damages or an account of profits should be reckoned, and in exercising such discretion the court may take into consideration the conduct of the parties in inserting such invalid claims in the specification or permitting them to remain there.
115. Scientific advisers.—(1) In any suit for infringement or in any proceeding before a court under this Act, the court may at any time, and whether or not an application has been made by any party for that purpose, appoint an independent scientific adviser to assist the court or to inquire and report upon any such question of fact or of opinion (not involving a question of interpretation of law) as it may formulate for the purpose.
(2) The remuneration of the scientific adviser shall be fixed by the court and shall include the costs of making a report and a proper daily fee for any day on which the scientific adviser may be required to attend before the court, and such remuneration shall be defrayed out of moneys provided by Parliament by law for the purpose.
3[CHAPTER XIX 4[APPEALS]
116. [Appellate Board.] Omitted by the Tribunals Reforms Act, 2021 (33 of 201), s. 13 (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).
117. [Staff of Appellate Board.] Omitted by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).
117A. Appeals to 5[High Court].—(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in sub-section (2), no appeal shall lie from any decision, order or direction made or issued under this Act by the Central Government, or from any act or order of the Controller for the purpose of giving effect to any such decision, order or direction.
(2) An appeal shall lie to the 3[High Court] from any decision, order or direction of the Controller of Central Government under section 15, section 16, section 17, section 18, section 19, 6[section 20, sub-section (4) of section 25, section 28], section 51, section 54, section 57, section 60, section 61, section 63, section 66, sub-section (3) of section 69, section 78, sub-sections (1) to (5) of section 84, section 85, section 88, section 91, section 92 and section 94.
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be in the prescribed form and shall be verified in such manner as may be prescribed and shall be accompanied by a copy of the decision, order or direction appealed against and by such fees as may be prescribed.

2. The words “or the Appellate Board” omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13 (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).
3. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 47, for Chapter XIX (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).
4. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13, for heading “APPEALS TO THE APPELLATE BOARD” (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).
5. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for “Appellate Board” (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).
6. Subs. by s. 61, ibid., for “section 20, section 25, section 27, section 28” (w.e.f. 2-4-2007).

(4) Every appeal shall be made within three months from the date of the decision, order or direction, as the case may be, of the Controller or the Central Government or within such further time as the 1[High Court] may, in accordance with the rules made by it, allow.
117B. [Procedure and powers of Appellate Board.] Omitted by the Tribunals Reforms Act, 2021 (33 of 201), s. 13 (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).
117C. [Bar of jurisdiction of courts, etc.] Omitted by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).
117D. [Procedure for application for rectification, etc., before Appellate Board.] Omitted by the Tribunals Reforms Act, 2021 (33 of 201), s. 13 (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).
117E. Appearance of Controller in legal proceedings.—(1) The Controller shall have the right to appear and be heard— (a) in any legal proceedings before the 1[High Court] in which the relief sought includes alteration or rectification of the register or in which any question relating to the practice of the patent office is raised;
(b) in any appeal to the 1[High Court] from an order of the Controller on an application for grant of a patent— (i) which is not opposed, and the application is either refused by the Controller or is accepted by him subject to any amendments, modifications, conditions or limitations, or (ii) which has been opposed and the Controller considers that his appearance is necessary in the public interest, and the Controller shall appear in any case if so directed by the 1[High Court].
(2) Unless the 1[High Court] otherwise directs, the Controller may, in lieu of appearing, submit a statement in writing signed by him, giving such particulars as he thinks proper of the proceedings before him relating to the matter in issue or of the grounds of any decision given by him or of the practice of the patent office in like cases, or of other matters relevant to the issues and within his knowledge as the Controller may deem it necessary, and such statement shall be evidence in the proceeding.
117F. [Costs of Controller in proceedings before Appellate Board.] Omitted by the Tribunals Reforms Act, 2021 (33 of 201), s. 13 (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).
117G. [Transfer of pending proceedings to Appellate Board.] Omitted by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 4-42021).
117H. [Power of Appellate Board to make rules.] Omitted by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).
CHAPTER XX
PENALTIES
118. Contravention of Secrecy provisions relating to certain inventions.—If any person fails to comply with any direction given under section 35 2[or makes or causes to be made an application for the grant of a patent in contravention of section 39], he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
119. Falsification of entries in register, etc.—If any person makes, or causes to be made, a false entry in any register kept under this Act, or a writing falsely purporting to be a copy of an entry in such a register, or produces or tenders, or causes to be produced or tendered, in evidence any such writing knowing the entry or writing to be false, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine or with both.

1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13, for “Appellate Board” (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).

120. Unauthorised claim of patent rights.—If any person falsely represents that any article sold by him is patented in India or is the subject of an application for a patent in India, 1[he shall be liable to penalty which may extend to ten lakh rupees, and in case of the continuing claim, a further penalty of one thousand rupees for every day after the first during which such claim continues] Explanation l.—For the purposes of this section, a person shall be deemed to represent— (a) that an article is patented in India if there is stamped, engraved or impressed on, or otherwise applied to, the article the word “patent” or “patented” or some other word expressing or implying that a patent for the article has been obtained in India;
(b) that an article is the subject of an application for a patent in India, if there are stamped, engraved or impressed on, or otherwise applied to, the article the words “patent applied for”, “patent pending”, or some other words implying that an application for a patent for the article has been made in India.
Explanation 2.—The use of words “patent”, “patented”, “patent applied for”, “patent pending” or other words expressing or implying that an article is patented or that a patent has been applied for shall be deemed to refer to a patent in force in India, or to a pending application for a patent in India, as the case may be unless there is an accompanying indication that the patent has been obtained or applied for in any country outside India.
121. [Wrongful use of words “patent office”.] Omitted by the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2023 (18 of 2023), s. 2 and Schedule (w.e.f. 01-08-2024).
122. Refusal or failure to supply information.—(1) If any person refuses or fails to furnish:— (a) to the Central Government any information which he is required to furnish under sub-section (5) of section 100;
(b) to the Controller any information or statement which he is required to furnish by or under section 146, 2[he shall be liable to penalty which may extend to one lakh rupees, and in case of the continuing refusal or failure, a further penalty of one thousand rupees for every day after the first during which such refusal or failure continues.] (2) If any person, being required to furnish any such information as is referred to in sub-section (1), furnishes information or statement which is false, and which he either knows or has reason to believe to be false or does not believe to be true, 3[he shall be liable to penalty for a sum equal to one half per cent.
of the total sale or turnover, as the case may be, of business or of the gross receipts in profession as computed in the audited accounts of such person, or a sum equal to five crore rupees, whichever is less].
123. Practice by non-registered patent agents.—If any person contravenes the provisions of section 129, 4[he shall be liable to penalty, which may extend to five lakh rupees, and in case of the continuing default, a further penalty of one thousand rupees for every day after the first during which such default continues].
124. Offences by companies.—(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, the company as well as every person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of its business at the time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.

1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule for certain words (w.e.f. 01-08-2024).
2. Subs. by s. 2 and Schedule, ibid., for the long line (w.e.f. 01-08-2024).
3. Subs. by s. 2 and Schedule, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 01-08-2024).
4. Subs. by s. 2 and Schedule, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 01-08-2024).

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— (a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals;
and (b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
1[124A. Adjudication of penalties.—The Controller may, by an order, authorise an officer referred to in section 73, to be the adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry and imposing penalty under the provisions of this Act, in the manner as may be prescribed, after giving the person concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
124B. Appeal.—(1) Whoever aggrieved by an order of the adjudicating officer under section 124A may prefer an appeal to the appellate authority, who shall be an officer at least one rank above the adjudicating officer, within a period of sixty days from the date of receipt of the order, as the Central Government may by notification authorise in this behalf.
(2) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(3) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period of sixty days if the appellant satisfies the appellate authority that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within that period.
(4) No appeal shall be disposed of unless the appellant has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(5) The appellate authority referred to in sub-section (1) shall dispose of the appeal within sixty days from the date of filing the appeal.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if the person fails to comply with the order of the adjudicating officer under section 124A or the order of the appellate authority under this section, as the case may be, within ninety days of such order, he shall, in addition to the penalty, be punishable with fine of one lakh rupees or imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with both.]
CHAPTER XXI PATENT AGENTS 2[125. Register of patent agents.—(1) The Controller shall maintain a register to be called the register of patent agents in which shall be entered the names, addresses and other relevant particulars, as may be prescribed, of all persons qualified to have their names so entered under section 126.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), it shall be lawful for the Controller to keep the register of patent agents in computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form subject to such safeguards as may be prescribed.]
126. Qualifications for registration as patent agents.—(1) A person shall be qualified to have his name entered in the register of patent agents if he fulfils the following conditions, namely:— (a) he is a citizen of India;
(b) he has completed the age of 21 years;

1. Ins. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule (w.e.f. 01-08-2024).

(c) he has obtained a 1[degree in science, engineering or technology from any University established under law for the time being in force] in the territory of India or possesses such other equivalent qualifications as the Central Government may specify in this behalf, and, in addition,—

2*

*

*

*

* (ii) has passed the qualifying examination prescribed for the purpose; 3[or] 2[(iii) has, for a total period of not less than ten years, functioned either as an examiner or discharged the functions of the Controller under section 73 or both, but ceased to hold any such capacity at the time of making the application for registration;] (d) he has paid such fee as may be prescribed.
4[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a person who has been registered as a patent agent before the commencement of 5[the Patents (Amendment) Act, 2005 (15 of 2005)] shall be entitled to continue to be, or when required to be re-registered, as a patent agent, on payment of the fee as may be prescribed.]
127. Rights of patent agents.—Subject to the provisions contained in this Act and in any rules made thereunder, every patent agent whose name is entered in the register shall be entitled:— (a) to practice before the Controller; and (b) to prepare all documents, transact all business and discharge such other functions as may be prescribed in connection with any proceeding before the Controller under this Act.
128. Subscription and verification of certain documents by patent agents.—(1) 6*** all applications and communications to the Controller under this Act may be signed by a patent agent authorised in writing in this behalf by the person concerned.
7*

*

*

*

*
129. Restrictions on practice as patent agents.—(1) No person, either alone or in partnerships with any other person, shall practise, describe or hold himself out as a patent agent, or permit himself to be so described or held out, unless he is registered as a patent agent or, as the case may be, unless he and all his partners are so registered.
(2) No company or other body corporate shall practise, describe itself or hold itself out as patent agents or permit itself to be so described or held out.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, practise as a patent agent includes any of the following acts, namely:— (a) applying for or obtaining patents in India or elsewhere;

1. Subs. by s. 53, ibid., for “degree from any University” (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).
2. Sub-clause (i) omitted by Act 15 of 2005, s. 67 ( w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
5. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 67, for “the Patents (Amendment) Act, 2002 (38 of 2002)” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
6. The words, brackets and figure “Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (2) and to any rules made under this Act,” omitted by Act 38 of 2002, s. 54 (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).

(b) preparing specifications or other documents for the purposes of this Act or of the patent law of any other country;
(c) giving advice other than of a scientific or technical nature as to the validity of patents or their infringement.
130. Removal from register of patent agents and restoration.—(1) The 1[Controller] may remove the name of any person from the register when 2[he] is satisfied, after giving that person a reasonable opportunity of being heard and after such further inquiry, if any, as 2[he] thinks fit to make— (i) that his name has been entered in the register by error or on account of misrepresentation or suppression of material fact;
(ii) that he has been convicted of any offence and sentenced to a term of imprisonment or has been guilty of misconduct in his professional capacity which in the opinion of the 1[Controller] renders him unfit to be kept in the register.
(2) The 1[Controller] may, on application and on sufficient cause being shown, restore to the register the name of any person removed therefrom.
131. Power of Controller to refuse to deal with certain agents.—(1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the Controller may refuse to recognise as agent in respect of any business under this Act— (a) any individual whose name has been removed from, and not restored to, the register;
(b) any person who has been convicted of an offence under section 123;
(c) any person, not being registered as a patent agent, who in the opinion of the Controller is engaged wholly or mainly in acting as agent in applying for patents in India or elsewhere in the name or for the benefit of the person by whom he is employed;
(d) any company or firm, if any person whom the Controller could refuse to recognise as agent in respect of any business under this Act, is acting as a director or manager of the company or is a partner in the firm.
(2) The Controller shall refuse to recognise as agent in respect of any business under this Act any person who neither resides nor has a place of business in India.
132. Savings in respect of other persons authorised to act as agents.—Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to prohibit— (a) the applicant for a patent 3*** from drafting any specification or appearing or acting before the Controller; or (b) an advocate, not being a patent agent, from taking part in any 4[hearing before the Controller on behalf of a party who is taking part in any proceedings under this Act].
CHAPTER XXII INTERNATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS 5[133. Convention countries.—Any country, which is a signatory or party or a group of countries, union of countries or inter-governmental organisations which are signatories or parties to an international, regional or bi-lateral treaty, convention or arrangement to which India is also a signatory or party and which affords to the applicants for patents in India or to citizens of India similar privileges as are granted to their own citizens or citizens to their member countries in respect of the grant of patents and protection of patent rights shall be a convention country or convention countries for the purposes of this Act.]

1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 55 for “Central Government” (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).
2. Subs. by s. 55, ibid., for “it” (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).
3. The words “or any person, not being a patent agent, who is duly authorised by the applicant” omitted by s. 56, ibid.
(w.e.f. 20-5-2003).

134. Notification as to countries not providing for reciprocity.—Where any country specified by the Central Government in this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette does not accord to citizens of India the same rights in respect of the grant of patents and the protection of patent rights as it accords to its own nationals, no national of such country shall be entitled, either solely or jointly with any other person,— (a) to apply for the grant of a patent or be registered as the proprietor of a patent;
(b) to be registered as the assignee of the proprietor of a patent; or (c) to apply for a licence or hold any licence under a patent granted under this Act.
135. Convention applications.—(1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 6, where a person has made an application for a patent in respect of an invention in a convention country (hereinafter referred to as the “basic application”), and that person or the legal representative or assignee of that person makes an application under this Act for a patent within twelve months after the date on which the basic application was made, the priority date of a claim of the complete specification, being a claim based on matter disclosed in the basic application, is the date of making of the basic application.
Explanation.—Where applications have been made for similar protection in respect of an invention in two or more convention countries, the period of twelve months referred to in this sub-section shall be reckoned from the date on which the earlier or earliest of the said applications was made.
(2) Where applications for protection have been made in one or more convention countries in respect of two or more inventions which are cognate or of which one is a modification of another, a single convention application may, subject to the provisions contained in section 10, be made in respect of those inventions at any time within twelve months from the date of the earliest of the said applications for protection:
Provided that the fee payable on the making of any such application shall be the same as if separate applications have been made in respect of each of the said inventions, and the requirements of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 136 shall, in the case of any such application, apply separately to the applications for protection in respect of each of the said inventions.
1[(3) In case of an application filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty designating India and claiming priority from a previously filed application in India, the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall apply as if the previously filed application were the basic application:
Provided that a request for examination under section 11B shall be made only for one of the applications filed in India.]
136. Special provisions relating to convention applications.—(1) Every convention application shall— (a) be accompanied by a complete specification; and (b) specify the date on which and the convention country in which the application for protection, or as the case may be, the first of such applications was made; and (c) state that no application for protection in respect of the invention had been made in a convention country before that date by the applicant or by any person from whom he derives title.
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in section 10, a complete specification filed with a convention application may include claims in respect of developments of, or additions to, the invention in respect of which the application for protection was made in a convention country, being developments or additions in respect of which the applicant would be entitled under the provisions of section 6 to make a separate application for a patent.

(3) A convention application shall not be post-dated under sub-section (1) of section 17 to a date later than the date on which under the provisions of this Act the application could have been made.
137. Multiple priorities.—(1) Where two or more applications for patents in respect of inventions have been made in one or more convention countries and those inventions are so related as to constitute one invention, one application may be made by any or all of the persons referred to in sub-section (1) of section 135 within twelve months from the date on which the earlier or earliest of those applications was made, in respect of the inventions disclosed in the specifications which accompanied the basic applications.
(2) The priority date of a claim of the complete specification, being a claim based on matters disclosed in one or more of the basic applications, is the date on which that matter was first so disclosed.
(3) For the purposes of this Act, a matter shall be deemed to have been disclosed in a basic application for protection in a convention country if it was claimed or disclosed (otherwise than by way of disclaimer or acknowledgment of a prior art) in that application, or any documents submitted by the applicant for protection in support of and at the same time as that application, but no account shall be taken of any disclosure effected by any such document unless a copy of the document is filed at the patent office with the convention application or within such period as may be prescribed after the filing of that application.
138. Supplementary provisions as to convention applications.—1[(1) Where a convention application is made in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, the applicant shall furnish, when required by the Controller, in addition to the complete specification, copies of the specifications or corresponding documents filed or deposited by the applicant in the patent office of the convention country as referred to in section 133 verified to the satisfaction of the Controller, within the prescribed period from the date of communication by the Controller.] (2) If any such specification or other document is in a foreign language, a translation into English of the specification or document, verified by affidavit or otherwise to the satisfaction of the Controller, shall be 2[furnished when required by the controller].
(3) For the purposes of this Act, the date on which an application was made in a convention country is such date as the Controller is satisfied by certificate of the official chief or head of the patent office of the convention country or otherwise, is the date on which the application was made in that convention country.
3[(4) An international application filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty designating India shall have effect of filing an application for patent under section 7, section 54 and section 135, as the case may be, and the title, description, claim and abstract and drawings, if any, filed in the international application shall be taken as complete specification for the purposes of this Act.
(5) The filing date of an application for patent and its complete specification processed by the patent office as designated office shall be the international filing date accorded under the Patent Cooperation Treaty.
(6) Amendment, if any, proposed by the applicant for an international application designating India or designating and electing India before international searching authority or preliminary made examination authority shall, if the applicant so desires, be taken as an amendment made before the patent office.]
139. Other provisions of Act to apply to convention applications.—Save as otherwise provided in this Chapter, all the provisions of this Act shall apply in relation to a convention application and a patent granted in pursuance thereof as they apply in relation to an ordinary application and a patent granted in pursuance thereof.
CHAPTER XXIII

2. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 58, for “annexed to the specification or document” (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).

MISCELLANEOUS
140. Avoidance of certain restrictive conditions.—(1) It shall not be lawful to insert— (i) in any contract for or in relation to the sale or lease of a patented article or an article made by a patented process; or (ii) in a licence to manufacture or use a patented article; or (iii) in a licence to work any process protected by a patent, a condition the effect of which may be— (a) to require the purchaser, lessee, or licensee to acquire from the vendor, lessor, or licensor, or his nominees, or to prohibit him from acquiring or to restrict in any manner or to any extent his right to acquire from any person or to prohibit him from acquiring except from the vendor, lessor, or licensor or his nominees, any article other than the patented article or an article other than that made by the patented process; or (b) to prohibit the purchaser, lessee or licensee from using, or to restrict in any manner or to any extent the right of the purchaser, lessee or licensee, to use an article other than the patented article or an article other than that made by the patented process, which is not supplied by the vendor, lessor or licensor or his nominee; or (c) to prohibit the purchaser, lessee or licensee from using or to restrict in any manner or to any extent the right of the purchaser, lessee or licensee to use any process other than the patented process; or 1[(d) to provide exclusive grant back, prevention to challenges to validity of patent and coercive package licensing,] and any such condition shall be void.
(2) A condition of the nature referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (1) shall not cease to be a condition falling within that sub-section merely by reason of the fact that the agreement containing it has been entered into separately, whether before or after the contract relating to the sale, lease or licence of the patented article or process.
(3) In proceedings against any person for the infringement of a patent, it shall be a defence to prove that at the time of the infringement there was in force a contract relating to the patent and containing a condition declared unlawful by this section:
Provided that this sub-section shall not apply if the plaintiff is not a party to the contract and proves to the satisfaction of the court that the restrictive condition was inserted in the contract without his knowledge and consent, express or implied.
(4) Nothing in this section shall— (a) affect a condition in a contract by which a person is prohibited from selling goods other than those of a particular person;
(b) validate a contract which, but for this section, would be invalid;
(c) affect a condition in a contract for the lease of, or licence to use, a patented article, by which the lessor or licensor reserves to himself or his nominee the right to supply such new parts of the patented article as may be required or to put or keep it in repair.
2*

*

*

*

*
141. Determination of certain contracts.—(1) Any contract for the sale or lease of a patented article or for licence to manufacture, use or work a patented article or process, or relating to any such sale, lease or licence 3*** may at any time after the patent or all the patents by which the article or process was

3. The words “ whether made before or after the commencement of this Act,” omitted by s. 60, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).

protected at the time of the making of the contract has or have ceased to be in force, and notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the contract or in any other contract, be determined by the purchaser, lessee, or licensee, as the case may be, of the patent on giving three months’ notice in writing to the other party.
(2) The provisions of this section shall be without prejudice to any right of determining a contract exercisable apart from this section.
142. Fees.—(1) There shall be paid in respect of the grant of patents and applications therefor, and in respect of other matters in relation to the grant of patents under this Act, such fees as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(2) Where a fee is payable in respect of the doing of an act by the Controller, the Controller shall not do that act until the fee has been paid.
1[(3) Where a fee is payable in respect of the filing of a document at the patent office, the fee shall be paid along with the document or within the prescribed time and the document shall be deemed not to have been filed at the office if the fee has not been paid within such time.] (4) Where a principal patent is granted later than two years from the date of filing of 2[the application], the fees which have become due in the meantime may be paid within a term of three months from the date of the recording of the patent in the register 3[or within the extended period not later than nine months from the date of recording].
4[143. Restrictions upon publication of specification.—Subject to the provisions of Chapter VII, an application for a patent, and any specification file in pursuance thereof, shall not, except with the consent of the applicant, be published by the Controller before the expiration of the period prescribed under sub-section (1) of section 11A or before the same is open to public inspection in pursuance of sub-section (3) of section 11A or section 43.]
144. Reports of Examiners to be confidential.—The reports of examiners to the Controller under this Act shall not be open to public inspection or be published by the Controller; and such reports shall not be liable to production or inspection in any legal proceeding unless the court certifies that the production or inspection is desirable in the interests of justice, and ought to be allowed.
5[145. Publication of official journal.—The Controller shall publish periodically an official journal which shall contain such information as may be required to be published by or under the provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder.]
146. Power of Controller to call for information from patentees.—(1) The Controller may, at any time during the continuance of the patent, by notice in writing, require a patentee or a licensee, exclusive or otherwise, to furnish to him within two months from the date of such notice or within such further time as the Controller may allow, such information or such periodical statements as to the extent to which the patented invention has been commercially worked in India as may be specified in the notice.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), every patentee and every licensee (whether exclusive or otherwise) shall furnish in such manner and form and at such intervals (not being less than six months) as may be prescribed statements as to the extent to which the patented invention has been worked on a commercial scale in India.
(3) The Controller may publish the information received by him under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) in such manner as may be prescribed.
147. Evidence of entries, documents, etc.—(1) A certificate purporting to be signed by the Controller as to any entry, matter or thing which he is authorised by this Act or any rules made thereunder to make or do, shall be prima facie evidence of the entry having been made and of the contents thereof and of the matter or thing having been done or omitted to be done.

1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 61 for sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 71, for “the complete specification” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
4. Subs. by Act s. 72, ibid., for section 143 (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

(2) A copy of any entry in any register or of any document kept in the patent office or of any patent, or an extract from any such register or document, purporting to be certified by the Controller and sealed with the seal of the patent office shall be admitted in evidence in all courts, and in all proceedings, without further proof or production of the original.
(3) The Controller or any other officer of the patent office shall not, in any legal proceedings to which he is not a party, be compellable to produce the register or any other document in his custody, the contents of which can be proved by the production of a certified copy issued under this Act or to appear as a witness to prove the matters therein recorded unless by order of the court made for special causes.
148. Declaration by infant, lunatic, etc.—(1) If any person is, by reason of minority, lunacy or other disability, incapable of making any statement or doing anything required or permitted by or under this Act, the lawful guardian, committee or manager (if any) of the person subject to the disability, or if there be none, any person appointed by any court possessing jurisdiction in respect of his property, may make such statement or a statement as nearly corresponding thereto as circumstances permit, and do such things in the name and on behalf of the person subject to the disability.
(2) An appointment may be made by the court for the purposes of this section upon the petition of any person acting on behalf of the person subject to the disability or of any other person interested in the making of the statement or the doing of the thing.
149. Service of notices, etc. by post.—Any notice required or authorised to be given by or under this Act, and any application or other document so authorised or required to be made or filed, may be given, made or filed by post.
150. Security for costs.—If any party by whom notice of any opposition is given under this Act or by whom application is made to the Controller for the grant of a licence under a patent neither resides nor carries on business in India, the Controller may require him to give security for the costs of the proceedings, and in default of such security being given may treat the opposition or application as abandoned.
151. Transmission of orders of courts to Controller.—(1) Every order of 1[the High Court 2***] on a petition for revocation, including orders granting certificates of validity of any claim, shall be transmitted by 1[the High Court 2***] to the Controller who shall cause an entry thereof and reference thereto to be made in the register.
(2) Where in any suit for infringement of a patent or in any suit under section 106 the validity of any claim or a specification is contested and that claim is found by the court to be valid or not valid, as the case may be, the court shall transmit a copy of its judgment and decree to the Controller who shall on receipt thereof cause an entry in relation to such proceeding to be made in the prescribed manner in a supplemental record.
(3) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall also apply to the court to which appeals are preferred against decisions of 3[the courts] referred to in those sub-sections.
152. [Transmission of copies of specification, etc., and inspection thereof.]—Omitted by The Patents (Amendment) Act, 2005 (15 of 2005), s. 75 (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
153. Information relating to Patents.—A person making a request to the Controller in the prescribed manner for information relating to any such matters as may be prescribed as respects any patent specified in the request or as respects any application for a patent so specified shall be entitled, subject to the payment of the prescribed fee, to have information supplied to him accordingly.
154. Loss or destruction of Patents.—If a patent is lost or destroyed, or its non-production is accounted for to the satisfaction of the Controller, the Controller may at any time, on application made in

1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 74, for “the High Court” (w.e.f. 2-4-2007).
2. The words “or the Appellate Board” omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13 (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).
3. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13, for “the Appellate Board or the courts, as the case may be” (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).

the prescribed manner and on payment of the prescribed fee, cause a duplicate thereof to be sealed and delivered to the applicant.
155. Reports of Controller to be placed before Parliament.—The Central Government shall cause to be placed before both Houses of Parliament once a year a report respecting the execution of this Act by or under the Controller.
156. Patent to bind Government.—Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, a patent shall have to all intents the like effect as against Government as it has against any person.
157. Right of Government to sell or use forfeited articles.—Nothing in this Act shall affect the power of the Government or of any person deriving title directly or indirectly from the Government to sell or use any articles forfeited under any law for the time being in force.
1[157A. Protection of security of India.—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government shall— (a) not disclose any information relating to any patentable invention or any application relating to the grant of patent under this Act, which it considers prejudicial to the interest of the security of India;
(b) take any action including the revocation of any patent which it considers necessary in the interest of the security of India by issue of a notification in the Official Gazette to that effect.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the expression “security of India” include any action necessary for the security of India which- (i) relates to fissionable materials or the materials from which they are derived; or (ii) relates to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war and to such traffic in other goods and materials as is carried on directly or indirectly for the purpose of supplying a military establishment; or (iii) is taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations.]
158. Power of High Courts to make rules.—The High Court may make rules consistent with this Act as to the conduct and procedure in respect of all proceedings before it under this Act.
159. Power of Central Government to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the Central Government may make rules to provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— (i) the form and manner in which any application for a patent, any specifications or drawings and any other application or document may be filed in the patent office;
2[(ia) the period which the Controller may allow for filing of statement and undertaking for in respect of applications under sub-section (1), the period within which the details relating to processing of applications may be filed before the Controller and the details to be furnished by the applicant to the Controller under sub-section (2) of section 8;
(ib) the period within which a reference to the deposit of materials shall be made in the specification under sub-clause (A) of clause (ii) of the proviso to sub-section (4) of section 10;
(ic) the period for which application for patent shall not be open to the public under sub-section (1) and the manner in which the applicant may make a request to the Controller to publish his application under subsection (2) of section 11A;
(id) the manner of making the request for examination for an application for patent and the period within which such examination shall be made under sub-sections (1) and (3) of section 11B;

1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 63, for section 157A (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 76, for clauses (ia) and (ib) (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

(ie) the manner in which an application for withdrawal of an application for grant of a patent shall be made and the period within which a request for examination from the date of revocation of secrecy directions shall be made under the proviso to sub-section (4) of section 11B.] (ii) the time within which any act or thing may be done under this Act, including the manner in which and the time within which any matter may be 1[published] under this Act;
(iii) the fees which may be payable under this Act and the manner 2[and time] of payment of such fees;
(iv) the matters in respect of which the examiner may make a report to the Controller;
3[(v) the manner in which and the period within which the Controller shall consider and dispose of a representation under sub-section (1) of section 25;
(va) the period within which the Controller is required to dispose of an application under section 39;] (vi) the form and manner in which and the time within which any notice may be given under this Act;
(vii) the provisions which may be inserted in an order for restoration of a patent for the protection of persons who may have availed themselves of the subject-matter of the patent after the patent had ceased;
(viii) the establishment of branch offices of the patent office and the regulation generally of the business of the patent office, including its branch offices;
(ix) the maintenance of the register of patents 2[and the safeguards to be observed in the maintenance of such register in computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form] and the matters to be entered therein;
(x) the matters in respect of which the Controller shall have powers of a civil court;
(xi) the time when and the manner in which the register and any other document open to inspection may be inspected under this Act;
(xii) the qualifications of, and the preparation of a roll of, scientific advisers for the purpose of section 115;
4*

*

*

* * (xiii) the manner in which any compensation for acquisition by Government of an invention may be paid;
5[(xiiia) the manner of holding inquiry and imposing penalty under section 124A;
(xiiib) the form and manner of preferring appeal under sub-section (2) of section 124B;] (xiv) the manner in which the register of patent agents may be maintained 2[under sub-section (1) of section 125 and the safeguards to be observed in the maintenance of such register of patent agents on computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form under sub-section (2) of that section] the conduct of qualifying examinations for patent agents; and matters connected with their practice and conduct, including the taking of disciplinary proceedings against patent agents for misconduct;
(xv) the regulation of the making, printing, publishing and selling of indexes to, and abridgments of, specifications and other documents in the patent office; and the inspection of indexes and abridgments and other documents;
(xvi) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed.

1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 76, for “advertised” (w.e.f. (1-1-2005).
3. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 76, for clause (v) (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
4. Clauses (xiia), (xiib) and (xiic) omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 13 (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).
5. Ins. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule (w.e.f. 01-08-2024).

(3) The power to make rules under this section shall be subject to condition of the rules being made after previous publications:
1[Provided that the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that the circumstances exist which render it practically not possible to comply with such condition of previous publication, dispense with such compliance.]
160. Rules to be placed before Parliament.—Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or 2[in two or more successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid] both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
161. [Special provisions with respect to certain applications deemed to have been refused under Act 2 of 1911.]—Omitted by The Patents (Amendment) Act, 2002 (38 of 2002), s. 46 (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).
162. Repeal of Act 2 of 1911 in so far as it relates to patents and savings.—(1) The Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911, in so far as it relates to patents, is hereby repealed, that is to say, the said Act shall be amended in the manner specified in the Schedule.
3*

*

*

*

* (4) The mention of particular matters in this section shall not prejudice the general application of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1987), with respect to repeals.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any suit for infringement of a patent or any proceeding for revocation of a patent, pending in any court at the commencement of this Act, may be continued and disposed of, as if this Act had not been passed.
163. [Amendment of Act 43 of 1958].—Omitted by The Patents (Amendment) Act, 2005 (15 of
2005), s. 77 (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).

1. The proviso added by Act 15 of 2005, s. 76 (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).
2. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for certain words (w.e.f. 15-5-1986).
3. Sub-sections (2) and (3) omitted by s. 66, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).

THE SCHEDULE [See section 162] AMENDMENTS TO THE INDIAN PATENTS AND DESIGNS ACT, 1911
1. Long title—Omit “Inventions and”.
2. Preamble—Omit “inventions and”.
3. Section 1—In sub-section (1) omit “Indian Patents and”.
4. Section 2— (a) omit clause (1);
(b) in clause (2) omit “(as respects designs)”;
(c) for clause (3), substitute— ‘(3) “controller” means the Controller General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks appointed under sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958);’;
(d) in clause (5) for “trade mark as defined in section 478”, substitute “trade mark as defined in clause (v) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958)”.;
(e) omit clause (6);
(f) in clause 7, after sub-clause (ee) insert,— “(f) in relation to the Union territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Goa, Daman and Diu, the High Court at Bombay;
(g) in relation to the Union territory of Pondicherry, the High Court at Madras.”;
(g) omit clauses (8), (10) and (11);
(h) for clause (12), substitute— ‘(12) “patent office” means the patent office referred to in section 74 of the Patents Act, 1970’.’
5. Omit Part I.
6. For section 51B, substitute— “51B. Designs to bind Government.—A registered design shall have to all intents the like effect as against Government as it has against any person and the provisions of Chapter XVII of the Patents Act, 1970, shall apply to registered designs as they apply to patents.”
7. In section 54, for “The provisions of this Act,” substitute “The provisions of the Patents Act, 1970”.
8. Omit sections 55 and 56.
9. Section 57—For sub-section (1), substitute— “(1) There shall be paid in respect of the registration of designs and applications therefor and in respect of other matters relating to designs under this Act such fees as may be prescribed by the Central Government.”.
10. Omit section 59A.
11. Section 61—Omit sub-section (1).

12. For section 62, substitute— “62. Power of Controller to correct clerical errors.—The Controller may, on request in writing accompanied by the prescribed fee, correct any clerical error in the representation of a design or in the name or address of the proprietor of any design or in any other matter which is entered upon the register of designs.”.
13. Section 63— (a) in sub-section (1), omit “to a patent or” and “patent or”;
(b) in sub-section (2), omit “patent or” and for “patents or designs, as the case may be,”, substitute “designs,”;
(c) in sub-section (3), omit “patent or” wherever that expression occurs;
(d) in sub-section (4), omit “to a patent or”.
14. Section 64— (a) in sub-section (1), omit “patents or” and omit the word “either” wherever it occurs;
(b) in sub-section (5), omit clause (a).
15. Omit section 66.
16. Section 67—Omit “for a patent, or for amendment of an application or of a specification, or”.
17. Section 69—In sub-section (1), omit "to grant a patent for an invention or”.
18. Section 71A—Omit “or from patents, specifications and other.”.
19. Omit section 72.
20. Omit sections 74A and 75.
21. Section 76— (a) in sub-section (1), omit “other”;
(b) in sub-section (2), in clause (c), omit “opponent”.
22. Section 77— (a) in sub-section (1)— (i) in clauses (c) and (d), omit “specifications”;
(ii) for clause (e), substitute— “(e) providing for the inspection of documents in the patent office and for the manner in which they may be published;”;
(iii) omit clause (eee);
(b) omit sub-section (2A).
23. Omit section 78.
24. For section 78A, substitute— “78A. Reciprocal arrangement with United Kingdom and other Commonwealth countries—(1) Any person who has applied for protection for any design in the United Kingdom or his legal representative or assignee shall, either alone or jointly with any other person, be entitled to claim that the registration of the said design under this Act shall be in priority to other applicants and shall have the same date as the date of the application in the United Kingdom:
Provided that— (a) the application is made within six months from the application for protection in the United Kingdom; and (b) nothing in this section shall entitle the proprietor of the design to recover damages for infringements happening prior to the actual date on which the design is registered in India.

(2) The registration of a design shall not be invalidated by reason only of the exhibition or use of, or the publication of a description or representation of, the design in India during the period specified in this section as that within which the application may be made.
(3) The application for the registration of a design under this section must be made in the same manner as an ordinary application under this Act.
(4) Where it is made to appear to the Central Government that the legislature of any such Commonwealth country as may be notified by the Central Government in this behalf has made satisfactory provision for the protection of designs registered in India, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the provisions of this section, with such variations or additions, if any, as may be set out in such notification, shall apply for the protection of designs registered in that Commonwealth country.”.
25. Omit sections 78B, 78C, 78D and 78E.
26. Omit the Schedule.


================================================================================
SOURCE: The Patents Rules, 2003 (incorporating all amendments till 15-03-2024).pdf
================================================================================

TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER I PRELIMINARY Rule 1. Short title and commencement Rule 2. Definitions Rule 3. Prescribed particulars Rule 4. Appropriate office Rule 5. Address for service Rule 6. Leaving and serving documents Rule 7. Fees Rule 8. Forms Rule 9. Filing of documents and copies, etc.
CHAPTER II APPLICATION FOR PATENTS Rule 10. Period within which proof of the right under section 7(2) to make the application shall be furnished Rule 11. Order of recording applications Rule 12. Statement and undertaking regarding foreign applications Rule 13. Specifications Rule 14. Amendments to specifications Rule 15. Drawings Rule 16. Models CHAPTER III INTERNATIONAL APPLICATIONS UNDER PATENT COOPERATION TREATY (PCT) Rule 17. Definitions Rule 18. Appropriate office in relation to international applications Rule 19. International applications filed with appropriate office as receiving office Rule 19A. Indian International Searching Authority Rule 19B. International search report Rule 19C. Time limit for establishing international search report Rule 19D. Transmittal of the International Search Report and written opinion Rule 19E. Confidential treatment Rule 19F. Indian International Preliminary Examining Authority Rule 19G. Period for making a demand Rule 19H. Fees payable to Examining Authority Rule 19I. Manner of making a demand Rule 19J. Processing of demands for International preliminary examination Rule 19K. InternationalPreliminary Examination Report Rule 19L. Period for establishing international preliminary examination report and its transmission Rule 19M. Transmittal of the International Preliminary Examination Report Rule 19N. Conditions for and extent of refund Rule 20. International applications designating or designating and electing India Rule 21. Filing of priority document Rule 22. Effect of non-compliance with certain requirements Rule 23. The requirements under this Chapter to be supplemental of the regulations, etc., under the Treaty
CHAPTER IV PUBLICATION AND EXAMINATION OF APPLICATIONS Rule 24. Publication of application Rule 24A. Request for publication Rule 24B. Examination of application Rule 24C. Expedited examination of applications Rule 25. Identification of published applications Rule 26. Request for withdrawal Rule 27. Inspection and supply of published documents Rule 28. Procedure in case of anticipation by prior publication Rule 28A. Procedure in relation to consideration of report of examiner under section 14 Rule 29. Procedure in case of anticipation by prior claiming Rule 30. Amendment of the complete specification in case of anticipation

Rule 31. Form of reference to another specification Rule 32. Procedure in case of potential infringement Rule 33. Form of reference to another patent Rule 34. Manner in which a claim under section 20(1) shall be made Rule 35. Manner in which a request may be made under section 20(4) Rule 36. Manner of application under section 20(5) Rule 37. Numbering of applications on the grant of patent Rule 38. [Omitted] CHAPTER V [Omitted] Rule 39-54. [Omitted]
CHAPTER VI OPPOSITION PROCEEDINGS TO GRANT OF PATENTS Rule 55. Opposition to the patent Rule 55A. Filing of notice of opposition Rule 56. Constitution of Opposition Board and its proceeding Rule 57. Filing of written statement of opposition and evidence Rule 58. Filing of reply statement and evidence Rule 59. Filing of reply evidence by opponent Rule 60. Further evidence to be left with the leave of the Controller Rule 61. Copies of documents to be supplied Rule 62. Hearing Rule 63. Determination of costs Rule 63A. Request made under section 26(1) Rule 64-65. [Omitted] Rule 66. Form of making a request under section 28(2) Rule 67. Form of making a claim under section 28(3) Rule 68. Form of application to be made under section 28(7) Rule 69. Procedure for the hearing of claim or an application under section 28 Rule 70. Mention of inventor
CHAPTER VII SECRECY DIRECTIONS Rule 71. Permission for making patent application outside India under section 39 Rule 72. Communication of result of reconsideration under section 36(2)
CHAPTER VIII GRANT OF PATENTS Rule 73. [Omitted] Rule 74. Form of patent Rule 74A. Inspection of documents related to grant of patent Rule 75. Amendment of patent under section Rule 76. Manner of applying for direction under section 51(1) Rule 77. Manner of application under section 51(2) Rule 78. Procedure for the hearing of proceedings under section 51 Rule 79. Request under section 52(2) Rule 80. Renewal fees under section 53 CHAPTER IX AMENDMENT OF APPLICATION, SPECIFICATION OR ANY DOCUMENT RELATING THERETO Rule 81. Amendment of application, specification or any document relating thereto Rule 82. Preparation of amended specifications, etc.
Rule 83. Publication of the amendment allowed
CHAPTER X RESTORATION OF PATENTS Rule 84. Restoration of patents Rule 85. Opposition to restoration under section 61 Rule 86. Payment of unpaid renewal fees
CHAPTER XI SURRENDER OF PATENTS Rule 87. Surrender of Patents
CHAPTER XII REGISTER OF PATENTS Rule 88. Register of patents under section 67 Rule 89. [Omitted] Rule 90. Registration of title and interest in patents Rule 91. Presentation of assignment, etc., of patent to Controller Rule 92. Registration of title or interest in a patent Rule 93. Entry of renewal fee Rule 94. Alteration of address Rule 95. Inspection of register of patents under section 72 and fees payable therefore
CHAPTER XIII COMPULSORY LICENCE AND REVOCATION OF PATENT Rule 96. Application for compulsory licence etc.
Rule 97. When a prima facie case is not made out Rule 98. Notice of opposition under section 87(2) Rule 99. Manner of publication of the revocation order Rule 100. Application under section 88(4) Rule 101. Procedure to be followed in case of applications under section 88(4)

Rule 102. Application for termination of compulsory licence under section 94
CHAPTER XIV SCIENTIFIC ADVISERS Rule 103. Roll of scientific advisers Rule 103A. Disqualifications for inclusion in the roll of scientific advisers Rule 104. Manner of application for inclusion in the roll of scientific advisers Rule 105. Inclusion of the name of any other person in the roll of scientific advisers Rule 106. Power to relax Rule 107. Removal of names from the roll of scientific advisers
CHAPTER XV PATENT AGENTS Rule 108. Particulars to be contained in the register of patent agents Rule 109. Application for registration of patent agents Rule 110. Particulars of the qualifying examination for patent agents Rule 111. Registration of patent agents Rule 111A. Issue of duplicate certificate of patent agents Rule 112. Details to be included in an application for the registration of a patent agent Rule 113. Registration of patent agents under section 126 (2) Rule 114. Disqualifications for registration as a patent agent Rule 115. Payment of fees Rule 116. Removal of a name from the register of patent agents Rule 117. Restoration of name of persons removed from the register of patent agents Rule 118. Alteration of names, etc., in the register of patent agents Rule 119. Refusal to recognise as patent agent Rule 120. Publication of the names of patent agents, registered under the Act
CHAPTER XVI MISCELLANEOUS Rule 121. Period within which copies of specification etc. are to be filed Rule 121A. Address of Communications Rule 122. Correction of clerical errors Rule 123. Manner of advertisement of the proposed correction of any error Rule 124. Manner and time of opposition to the making of corrections Rule 125. Notification of corrections Rule 126. Form, etc., of affidavits Rule 127. Exhibits Rule 128. Directions not otherwise prescribed Rule 129. Exercise of discretionary power by the Controller Rule 129A. Adjournment of hearing Rule 130. Application for review of decisions or setting aside of orders of the Controller Rule 131. Form and manner in which statements required under section 146(2) to be furnished Rule 132. Form of application for the issue of duplicate patent Rule 133. Supply of certified copies and certificates under sections 72 and 147 Rule 134. Request for information under section 153 Rule 135. Agency Rule 136. Scale of costs Rule 137. Powers of Controller generally Rule 138. Power to extend time prescribed Rule 139. Hearing before the Controller to be in public in certain cases THE FIRST SCHEDULE.— FEES THE SECOND SCHEDULE.— FORMS FORM 1.— Application for Grant of Patent FORM 2.— Provisional/Complete Specification FORM 3.— Statement and undertaking under Section 8 FORM 4.— Request for Extension of Time FORM 5.— Declaration as to Inventorship FORM 6.— Claim or request regarding any change in applicant for Patent FORM 7.— Notice of Opposition FORM 7A.— Representation for Opposition to Grant of Patent FORM 8.— Request or Claim regarding mention of Inventor as such in a Patent FORM 9.— Request for Publication FORM 10.— Application for Amendment of Patent FORM 11.— Application for Direction of the Controller FORM 12.— Request for Grant of Patent under section 26(1) & 52(2) FORM 13.— Application for amendment of the application for Patent/Complete Specification FORM 14.— Notice of opposition to amendment/restoration/ surrender of Patent/Grant of compulsory licence or revision of terms thereof or to corretion of clerical errors FORM 15.— Application for the restoration of patent FORM 16.— Application for registration of title/interest in a patent or share in it or registration of any document purporting to affect proprietorship of the patent FORM 17.— Application for compulsory licence FORM 18.— Request/Express reqest for examination of application for patent

FORM 18A.— Request for Expedited Examination of application for patent FORM 19.— Application for revocation of a patent for non working FORM 20.— Application for revision of terms and conditions of licence FORM 21.— Request for termination of compulsory licence FORM 22.— Application for registration of patent agent FORM 23.— Application for the restoration of the name in the register of patent agents FORM 24.— Application for review/setting aside controller's decision/order FORM 25.— Request for permission for making patent application outside India FORM 26.— Form for authorisation of a patent agent/or any person in a matter or proceeding under the act FORM 27.— Statement regarding the working of the patented invention on commercial scale in India FORM 28.— Form to be submitted by a Small Entity/Startup/Educational Institute FORM 29.— Request for Withdrawal of the application for patent FORM 30.— Form to be used when no other form is prescribed THE THIRD SCHEDULE.— FORM OF PATENT THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.— SCALE OF COSTS THE FIFTH SCHEDULE.— FIFTH SCHEDULE Notes and Disclaimers:
1. The e-Version (HTML) of the Patent Rules, 2003 is updated till 21-09-2021.
2. For details of every amendments, please refer to the relevant Gazette available on website ( https://www.ipindia.gov.in ).
3. While every efforts has been made to ensure the correctness of the contents of e-version, any deviation(s) noted may be brought to the notice of Intellectual Property Office at ipo-helpdesk@nic.in for corrective measures. The contents of the Gazette(s) shall prevail over e-Version in case of any deviations.

CHAPTER I PRELIMINARY Short title and commencement (1) These rules may be called the Patents Rules, 2003.
(2) They shall come into force on the date on which the Patents (Amendment) Act, 2002 comes into force.

Definitions In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "Act" means the Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 1970);
(b) "appropriate office" means the appropriate office of the patent office as specified in rule 4;
(c) "article" includes any substance or material, and any plant, machinery or apparatus, whether affixed to land or not;
(ca)"educational institution" means a university established or incorporated by or under Central Act, a Provincial Act, or a State Act, and includes any other educational institution as recognised by an authority designated by the Central Government or the State Government or the Union territories in this regard;
(d) "Form" means a Form specified in the Second Schedule;
(da) "person other than a natural person" shall include a "small entity";
(db) "Request for examination" means a request for examination, including expedited examination, made under section 11B in respect of rule 24B or rule 24C;
(e) "Schedule" means Schedule to these rules;
(f) "section" means a section of the Act;
(fa) "small entity" means, - (i) in case of an enterprise engaged in the manufacture or production of goods, an enterprise where the investment in plant and machinery does not exceed the limit specified for a medium enterprise under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 7 of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 (27 of 2006); and (ii)in case of an enterprise engaged in providing or rendering of services, an enterprise where the investment in equipment is not more than the limit specified for medium enterprises under clause (b) of sub-section ( I ) of Section 7 of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006.
Explanation 1. - For the purpose of this clause, "enterprise" means an industrial undertaking or a business concern or any other establishment, by whatever name called, engaged in the manufacture or production of goods, in any manner, pertaining to any industry specified in the First Schedule to the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951) or engaged in providing or rendering of any service or services in such an industry.
Explanation 2. - In calculating the investment in plant and machinery, the cost of pollution control, research and development, industrial safety devices and such other things as may be specified by notification under the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 (27 of 2006); shall be excluded.
Explanation 3.- The reference rates of foreign currency of the Reserve Bank of India shall prevail.
(fb) (i) "Startup" means (a) an entity in India recognised as a startup by the competent authority under Startup India initiative.
(b) In case of a foreign entity, an entity fulfilling the criteria for turnover and period of incorporation/ registration as per Startup India Initiative and submitting declaration to that effect.
Explanation: In calculating the turnover, reference rates of foreign currency of Reserve Bank of India shall prevail.
(g) words and expressions used, but not defined in these rules, shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Act.

Prescribed particulars Save as otherwise provided in these rules, the particulars contained in a Form are hereby prescribed as the particulars, if any, required under the relevant provision or provisions of the Act.

Appropriate office (1) The appropriate office of the patent office shall- (i) for all the proceedings under the Act, be the head office of the patent office or the branch office, as the case may be, within whose territorial limits-- (a) the applicant or first mentioned applicant in case of joint applicants for a patent, normally resides or has his domicile or has a place of business or the place from where the invention actually originated; or (b) the applicant for a patent or party in a proceeding if he has no place of business or domicile in India, the address for service in India given by such applicant or party is situated; and (2) The appropriate office once decided in respect of any proceedings under the Act shall not ordinarily be changed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (2), the Controller may transfer an application for patent so filed, to head office or, as the case may be, branch office of the Patent Office.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), further application referred to in section 16 of the Act, shall be filed at the appropriate office of the first mentioned application only.
(5) All further applications referred to section 16 of the Act filed in an office other than the appropriate office of the first mentioned application, before the commencement of the Patents (Amendment) Rules, 2013, shall.be transferred to the appropriate office of the first mentioned application.

Address for service Every person, concerned in any proceedings to which the Act or these rules relate and every patentee, shall furnish to the Controller an address for service, including a postal address in India and an e-mail address, and such address for service shall be treated for all purposes connected with such proceedings or patent as the address of the person concerned in the proceedings or of the patentee. Unless such an address for service is given, the Controller shall be under no obligation either to proceed or deal with any proceeding, or patent or to send any notice that may be required to be given under the Act or these rules and the Controller may take suo motu decision in the matter: Provided that a patent agent shall also be required to furnish to the Controller a mobile number registered in India.

Leaving and serving documents (1) Any application, notice or other document authorised or required to be filed, left, made or given at the patent office, or to the Controller or to any other person under the Act or these rules, may be tendered by hand or sent by a letter addressed to the Controller at the appropriate office or to that person through post or registered post or speed post or by electronic transmission duly authenticated. If it is sent by post or registered post or speed post or by electronic transmission duly authenticated, it shall be deemed to have been filed, left, made or given at the time when the mail containing the same would have been delivered in the ordinary course of post or registered post or speed post, or by electronic transmission duly authenticated, as the case may be. In proving such sending, it shall be sufficient to show that the mail was properly addressed and transmitted.
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), a patent agent shall file, leave, make or give all documents only by electronic transmission duly authenticated: Provided that any document, if asked to be submitted in original, shall be submitted within a period of fifteen days, failing which such documents shall be deemed not to have been filed.
(2) Any written communication addressed to a patentee at his postal address or e-mail address, as it appears on the register of patents or at his address for service given under rule 5, or to any applicant or opponent in any proceedings under the Act or these rules, at the postal address or e-mail address, appearing on the application or notice of opposition, or given for service, shall be deemed to be properly addressed.
(3) All notices and all written communications addressed to a patentee, or to any applicant or opponent in any proceedings under the Act or these rules, and all documents forwarded to the patentee or to the said applicant or opponent, shall, except when they are sent by special messenger, be sent by registered post or speed post or by electronic transmission duly authenticated.
(4) The date of a notice or a written communication addressed to a patentee or to any applicant or opponent in any proceedings under the Act and these rules shall be the date of dispatch of the said notice or written communication, by registered post or speed post or fax or electronic transmission duly authenticated, as the case may be, unless otherwise specified under the Act or these rules.
(5) In case of delay in receipt of a document or a communication sent by the patent office to a party to any proceedings under the Act or these rules, the delay in transmitting or resubmitting a document to the patent office or doing any act by the party may be condoned by the Controller if a petition for such condonation of delay is made by the party to the Controller immediately after the receipt of the document or a communication along with a statement regarding the circumstances of the fact and evidence in support of the statement:
Provided that the delay condoned by the Controller shall not exceed the period between the date on which the party was supposed to have received the document or communication by ordinary course of mail or electronic transmission and the actual date of receipt of the same.
(6) Without prejudice to sub-rule (5) and notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (2) of rule 138, the Controller may condone the delay in transmitting or resubmitting a document to the patent office or performing any act by a party, if a petition for such condonation of delay is made by the party to the Controller along with a statement regarding the circumstances of the fact and evidence in support of the statement, to the satisfaction of the Controller, that the delay was due to war, revolution, civil disorder, strike, natural calamity, a general unavailability of electronic communication services or other like reason in the locality where the party resides or has place of business, and that such situation was of such severity that it disrupted the normal communication in that area and that the relevant action was taken as soon as reasonably possible not later than one month from the date when such situation had ceased to exist: Provided that the delay condoned by the Controller shall not exceed the period for which the national emergency was in force, or six months from the expiry of the prescribed period, whichever is earlier.
(7) Any liability or burden of proof regarding the authenticity of any document filed, left, made or given under these rules, including electronically transmitted documents, shall lie only with the party filing, leaving, making or giving the document.

Fees (1) The fees payable under section 142 in respect of the grant of patents and applications therefor, and in respect of other matters for which fees are required to be payable under the Act shall be as specified in the First Schedule.
Provided that ten per cent additional fee shall be payable when the applications for patent and other documents are filed through physical mode, namely, in hard copy format: Provided further that in the case of a small entity, or startup, or educational institution, every document for which a fee has been specified shall be accompanied by Form-28.
(2) (a) (a) The fees payable under the Act or these rules may be paid at the appropriate office either in cash or through electronic means or may be sent by bank draft or banker's cheque payable to the Controller of Patents and drawn on a scheduled bank at the place where the appropriate office is situated and if the draft or banker's cheque is sent by post, the fees shall be deemed to have been paid on the date on which the draft or banker's cheque has actually reached the Controller.
(b) omitted (c) Where a fee is payable in respect of a document, the entire fee shall accompany the document.
(3) In case an application processed by a natural person, startup, small entity or educational institution is fully or partly transferred to a person other than a natural person, startup, small entity or educational institution, the difference, if any, in the scale of fees between the fees charged from the natural person, startup, small entity or educational institution and the fees chargeable from the person other than a natural person, startup, small entity or educational institution, shall be paid by the new applicant along with the request for transfer.
Explanation - Where a startup or small entity, having filed an application for a patent, ceases to be a startup or small entity due to the lapse of the period during which it is recognized by the competent authority, or its turnover subsequently crosses the financial threshold limit as notified by the competent authority, no such difference in the scale of fees shall be payable.
(3A) shall be omitted;
(3B) shall be omitted;
(4) Fees once paid in respect of any proceeding shall not ordinarily be refunded irrespective of whether the proceeding has taken place or not:
Provided that, if the Controller is satisfied that during the online filing process, the fee was paid more than once for the same proceeding, the excess fee shall be refunded.
(4A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (4), upon the withdrawal of an application in respect of which a request for examination has been filed, but before issuance of first statement of objection, the fee may be refunded to the extent prescribed in the First Schedule on a request made by the applicant in Form 29.
(5) (i) Subject to the approval of the Controller, any person may deposit money in advance and request the Controller to realise any fee payable by him from the said deposit and in such case the date of the receipt of the request to realise the fee or the date on which the request to realise the fee is deemed to have been received, whichever is earlier, shall be taken as the date of payment of the fee: Provided that the requisite amount of money is available at the credit of the person making such request.
(ii) Subject to the approval of the Controller, any person may discontinue the deposit of money in advance and in such case the balance, if any, shall be refunded.

Forms (1) The Forms set forth in the Second Schedule with such variations as the circumstances of each case may require shall be used for the purposes mentioned therein.
(2) Where no Form is so specified for any purpose, the applicant may use Form 30 specified in the Second Schedule.

Filing of documents and copies, etc (1) All documents and copies of the documents, except affidavits and drawings, filed with patent office, shall - (a)be typewritten or printed in Hindi or English (unless otherwise directed or allowed by the Controller) in large and legible characters not less than
0.28 centimetre high with deep indelible ink with lines widely spaced not less than one and half spaced only upon one side of the paper;
(b)be on such paper which is flexible, strong, white, smooth, non-shiny, and durable of size A4 of approximately 29.7 centimetre by 21centimetre with a margin of at least 4 centimetre on the top and left hand part and 3 centimetre on the bottom and right hand part thereof;
(c)be numbered in consecutive Arabic numerals in the centre of the bottom of the sheet; and (d)contain the numbering to every fifth line of each page of the description and each page of the claims at right half of the left margin.
(2) Any signature which is not legible or which is written in a script other than English or Hindi shall be accompanied by a transcription of the name either in Hindi or English in capital letters.
(3) In case, the application for patent discloses sequence listing of nucleotides or amino acid sequences, the sequence listing of nucleotides or amino acid sequences shall be filed in computer readable text format along with the application, and no print form of the sequence listing of nucleotides or amino acid sequences is required to be given.
(4) Additional copies of all documents shall be filed at the appropriate office as may be required by the Controller.
(5) Names and addresses of applicant and other persons shall be given in full together with their nationality and such other particulars, if any, as are necessary for their identification.

CHAPTER II APPLICATION FOR PATENTS Period within which proof of the right under section 7(2) to make the application shall be furnished Where, in an application for a patent made by virtue of an assignment of the right to apply for the patent for the invention, if the proof of the right to make the application is not furnished with the application, the applicant shall within a period of six months after the filing of such application furnish such proof.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this rule, the six months period in case of an application corresponding to an international application in which India is designated shall be reckoned from the actual date on which the corresponding application is filed in India.

Order of recording applications The applications filed in a year shall constitute a series identified by the year of such filing. In case of an application filed corresponding to an international application in which India is designated, such application shall constitute a series distinct from the rest of the applications identified by the year of filing of corresponding applications in India.

Statement and undertaking regarding foreign applications (1) The statement and undertaking required to be filed by an applicant for a patent under sub-section (1) of section 8 shall be made in Form 3.
(1A). The period within which the applicant shall file the statement and undertaking under sub-section (1) of section 8 shall be six months from the date of filing the application.
Explanation.--For the purpose of this rule, the period of six months in case of an application corresponding to an international application in which India is designated shall be reckoned from the actual date on which the corresponding application is filed in India.
(2) The time within which the applicant for a patent shall keep the Controller informed of the details in respect of other applications filed in any country in the undertaking to be given by him under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 8 shall be six months from the date of such filing.
(3) When so required by the Controller under sub-section (2) of section 8, the applicant shall furnish information relating to objections, if any, in respect of novelty and patentability of the invention and any other particulars as the Controller may require which may include claims of application allowed within six months from the date of such communication by the Controller.

Specifications (1) Every specification, whether provisional or complete, shall be made in Form 2.
(2) A specification in respect of a divisional application under section 16 shall contain specific reference to the number of the original application from which the divisional application is made.
(3) A specification in respect of a patent of addition under section 54 shall contain a specific reference to the number of the main patent, or the application for the main patent, as the case may be, and a definite statement that the invention comprises an improvement in, or a modification of, the invention claimed in the specification of the main patent granted or applied for.
(4) Where the invention requires explanation through drawings, such drawings shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of rule 15 and shall be supplied with, and referred to in detail, in the specification, including the claims where the features illustrated in the drawings shall be followed by their respective reference signs in parentheses: Provided that in case of a complete specification, if the applicant desires to adopt the drawings filed with the provisional specification as the drawings or part of the drawings for the complete specification, it shall be sufficient to refer to them in the complete specification as those left or filed with the provisional specification.
(5) Irrelevant or other matter, not necessary, in the opinion of the Controller, for elucidation of the invention, shall be excluded from the title, description, claims and drawings.
(6) Except in the case of an application (other than a convention application or an application filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty designating India) which is accompanied by a complete specification, a declaration as to the inventorship of the invention shall be filed in Form 5 with the complete specification or at any time before the expiration of one month from the date of filing of the complete specification, as the Controller may allow on an application made in Form 4.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this rule, the date of filing of the complete specification with respect to an application corresponding to an international application in which India is designated shall be reckoned from the actual date on which the corresponding application is filed in India.
(7) (a) The abstract as specified under clause (d) of sub-section (4) of section 10, accompanying the specification shall commence with the title of the invention. The title of the invention shall disclose the specific features of the invention normally in not more than fifteen words.
(b) The abstract shall contain a concise summary of the matter contained in the specification and the summary shall indicate clearly the technical field to which the invention belongs, technical advancement of the invention as compared to the existing knowledge and principal use of the invention excluding any speculative use and where necessary, the abstract shall contain the chemical formula, which characterises the invention.
(c) The abstract may not contain more than one hundred and fifty words.
(d) If the specification contains any drawing, the applicant shall indicate on the abstract the figure, or exceptionally, the figures of the drawings which may accompany the abstract when published. Each main feature mentioned in the abstract and illustrated by a drawing shall be followed by the reference sign used in that drawing.
(e) The abstract shall be so drafted that it constitutes an efficient instrument for the purposes of searching in the particular technical field, in particular by making it possible to assess whether there is a need to consult the specification itself.
(8) The period within which reference to the deposit shall be made in the specification under sub-clause (A) of clause (ii) of sub-section (4) of section 10 shall be three months from the date of filing of the application: Provided that in case of a request for publication under rule 24A, such reference shall be made on or before the date of filing of such request.

Amendments to specifications (1) When amendments are made to a provisional or complete specification or any drawing accompanying it, the pages incorporating such amendments shall be retyped and submitted to form a continuous document.
(2) A marked copy clearly identifying the amendments carried out and a statement clearly indicating the portion (page number and line number) of the specification or drawing being amended along with the reason shall also be filed.
(3) Amendments shall not be made by slips pasted on, or as footnotes or by writing in the margin of any of the said documents.
(4) When a retyped page or pages incorporating amendments are submitted, the corresponding earlier page shall be deemed to have been superseded and cancelled by the applicant.

Drawings (1) Drawings, when furnished under section 10 by the applicants otherwise than on requisition made by the Controller, shall accompany the specifications to which they relate.
(2) No drawings or sketch, which would require a special illustration of the specification, shall appear in the specification itself.
(3) At least one copy of the drawing shall be prepared neatly and clearly on a durable paper sheet.
(4) Drawings shall be on standard A4 size sheets with a clear margin of at least 4 cm on the top and left hand and 3cm at the bottom and right hand of every sheet.
(5) Drawings shall be on a scale sufficiently large to show the inventions clearly and dimensions shall not be marked on the drawings.
(6) Drawings shall be sequentially or systematically numbered and shall bear- (i) in the left hand top corner, the name of the applicant;
(ii) in the right hand top corner, the number of the sheets of drawings, and the consecutive number of each sheet; and (iii) in the right hand bottom corner, the signature of the applicant or his agent.
(7) No descriptive matter shall appear on the drawings except in the flow diagrams.

Models (1) Models or samples shall be furnished under section 10 only when required by the Controller.

CHAPTER III INTERNATIONAL APPLICATIONS UNDER PATENT COOPERATION TREATY (PCT) Definitions In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,-- (a) "Article" means an Article of the Treaty;
(aa) "Examining Authority" means the Indian International Preliminary Examining Authority referred to in sub-rule (1) of rule 19F;
(ab) "International Bureau" means the International Bureau of World Intellectual Property Organisation;
(ac) "Searching Authority" means the Indian International Searching Authority referred to in sub-rule (1) of rule 19A;
(b) "Treaty" or "PCT" means the Patent Cooperation Treaty.
(c) All other words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the PCT shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in that Treaty.

Appropriate office in relation to international applications (1) The receiving office, the designated office and the elected office, as the case may be, for the purposes of international applications shall be the appropriate office referred to in rule 4.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), the Patent Office, Delhi branch shall be the appropriate office for dealing with the International Bureau and any other International Searching Authority and International Preliminary Examining Authority.
(3) An international application shall be filed at and processed by the appropriate office, referred to in sub-rule (1), in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter,the Treaty and the regulations under the Treaty.
(4) The appropriate office referred to in sub-rule (1),shall, on receipt of an international application, (a) keep one copy of the application to be called the "home copy" in its office;
(b) transmit one copy to be called the "record copy" to the International Bureau; and (c) transmit one copy to be called "search copy'' to the competent International Searching Authority referred to in Article 16 of the Treaty, And simultaneously furnish complete details of such application to the Patent Office, Delhi branch.

International applications filed with appropriate office as receiving office (1) An international application shall be filed with the appropriate office in triplicate either in English or Hindi language.
(2) The fees payable in respect of an international application shall, in addition to the fees specified in the regulations under the Treaty, be the fees as specified in the First Schedule and the Fifth Schedule.
(3) Where an international application has not been filed in triplicate, the appropriate office shall, upon payment of fees specified in the First Schedule, prepare the required additional copies.
(4) On receipt of a request from the applicant and on payment of the fees specified in the First Schedule, the appropriate office shall prepare a certified copy of the priority document and promptly transmit the same to the International Bureau and intimate the applicant and the Patent Office, Delhi branch.

Indian International Searching Authority (1) The Patent Office, Delhi branch shall perform the functions of the Indian International Searching Authority under the treaty in accordance with an agreement between the Indian Patent Office and the International Bureau.
(2) The fees payable to the Searching Authority shall,in addition to the fees specified in the regulations made under the Treaty,be the fees as specified in the Fifth Schedule.
(3) The Searching Authority referred to in sub-rule (1), shall establish international search report in respect of international applications, or, as the case may be, declare in accordance with sub-rule (3) of rule 19B, in cases where India has been indicated as a competent International Searching Authority.

Rule 19B International search report (1) The Searching Authority shall, on receipt of the search copy, notify the International Bureau and the applicant about the receipt of search copy with identification mark 'ISA/IN' along with the international application number and its serial number and the date of receipt of the search copy.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the proviso to item (i) of sub-rule (2) of rule 24B, the Searching Authority shall, upon receipt of the search copy, refer the international application, in the order in which the search copy was received, to an examiner or any other officer appointed under subsection (2) of Section 73 of the Act for preparing an international search report, in accordance with the provisions contained in the Treaty and the regulations under the Treaty, ordinarily within a period of one month but not exceeding two months from the date of such reference.
(3) The Searching Authority, if it considers that- (a) the international application relates to a subject matter which the Searching Authority is not required to search and accordingly decides not to search; or (b) the description, claims or drawings fail to comply with the requirements prescribed under the regulation under the Treaty to such an extent that a meaningful search could not be carried out, the Authority shall so declare and notify the applicant and the International Bureau that no international search report shall be established.
(4) In a case where any situation referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-rule (3) is found to exist in connection with certain claims only, the Searching Authority shall indicate this fact in the International Search Report in respect of such claims, and for other claims, it shall establish the International Search Report.
(5) The Searching Authority, if it considers that the international application does not comply with the requirement of unity of invention, in accordance with the provisions contained in Rule 13 of the regulations under the Treaty, shall send a notice specifying the reasons for which the international application is not considered as complying with the requirement of unity of invention and inviting the applicant- (a) to pay the additional fees specified in the Fifth Schedule, indicating the amount of fees to be paid, within a period of one month from the date of such invitation; and (b) to pay, where applicable, the protest fee specified in the Fifth Schedule, indicating the amount of fee to be paid, within a period of one month from the date of such invitation.
(6) The Searching Authority shall establish the International Search Report on those parts of the international application which relate to the invention first mentioned in the claims ("main invention") and subject to payment of additional fee within the period specified in sub-rule (5), on those parts of the international application which relate to inventions in respect of which such additional fees were paid.
(7) Any applicant may pay the additional fees under protest, that is, accompanied by a reasoned statement to the effect that the international application complies with the requirement of unity of invention or that the amount of the required additional fees is excessive.
(8) The examination of the protest referred to in sub-rule (7) shall be carried out by a Review Committee constituted by the Controller.
(9) The Review Committee constituted under sub-rule (8) shall examine the extent to which the protest is justified and shall accordingly order for the total or partial reimbursement of the additional fee to the applicant.
(10) Where the applicant has not paid the fees for the protest in accordance with clause (b) of sub-rule (5),the protest shall be considered not to have been made and the Searching Authority shall so declare.
(11) The protest fee shall be refunded to the applicant where the Review Committee referred to in sub-rule (8) finds that the protest was entirely justified.
(12) Where the international application contains the disclosure of one or more nucleotide or amino acid sequences and the sequences are not furnished in computer-readable text format, the Searching Authority shall send a notice to the applicant to submit the sequence listing in computerreadable text format and pay the late furnishing fee specified in the Fifth Schedule, within a period of one month from the date of such notice and if the applicant fails to comply with the notice, the Searching Authority shall search the international application to the extent that a meaningful search can be carried out without the sequence listing.

Rule 19C Time limit for establishing international search report The Searching Authority shall establish the International Search Report and written opinion or, as the case may be, the declaration referred to in subrule (3) of rule 19B within a period of three months from the date of receipt of the search copy by the Searching Authority, or within a period of nine months from the date of priority, whichever expires later.

Rule 19D Transmittal of the International Search Report and written opinion The Searching Authority shall transmit one copy of the International Search Report or of the declaration referred to in Article 17(2)(a) of the Treaty, and one copy of the written opinion established under Rule 43bis.1 of the regulations under the Treaty, to the International Bureau and one copy to the applicant, on the same day.

Rule 19E Confidential treatment All matters pertaining to international applications shall be kept confidential in accordance with the treaty and the regulations under the Treaty.

Rule 19F Indian International Preliminary Examining Authority (1) The Patent Office, Delhi branch shall perform the functions of the International Preliminary Examining Authority under the Treaty in accordance with an agreement between the Indian Patent Office and the International Bureau.
(2) The Examining Authority referred to in sub-rule (1), shall establish- (a) the International Preliminary Examination Report in respect of all international applications electing India as an International Preliminary Examining Authority;
(b) the International Preliminary Examination Report in respect of the demands filed by the nationals or residents of other countries in accordance with an agreement between Indian Patent Office and the International Bureau, upon being notified by the International Bureau;
(c) the International Preliminary Examination in respect of demands made by the nationals or residents of other countries not party to the Treaty or not bound by Chapter II of the Treaty,if the Assembly has so approves.

Rule 19G Period for making a demand.
(1) The demand for international preliminary examination shall be made within the period specified in the Treaty or regulations under the Treaty.
(2) In case the demand is made after the expiry of the period specified in sub-rule (1), it shall be considered to have not been made and no International Preliminary Examination Report shall be prepared.

Rule 19H Fees payable to Examining Authority.
The fees payable to the Examining Authority shall, in addition to the fees specified in the regulations under the Treaty,be the fees specified in the Fifth Schedule.

Rule 19I Manner of making a demand.
A demand shall be made in accordance with the provisions contained in these rules, the Treaty and the regulations under the Treaty.

Rule 19J Processing of demands for international preliminary examination.
(1) The Examining Authority, on receipt of the demand for international preliminary examination, if the Examining Authority is competent to conduct an international preliminary examination, shall assign the identification mark 'IPEA/IN' and shall notify the Applicant and the International Bureau.
(2) In case where the Examining Authority is not competent to conduct the international preliminary examination of the international application, it shall transmit the demand promptly to the International Bureau.

Rule 19K International Preliminary Examination Report.
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the proviso to item (i) of sub-rule (2) of rule 24B, the Examining Authority shall refer the international application, in accordance with the provisions contained in the Treaty and the regulations under the Treaty, in the order in which the demand was received in the Examining Authority to an examiner or any other officer appointed under sub-section (2) of section 73 of the Act for preparing an International Preliminary Examination Report ordinarily within a period of three months but not exceeding four months from the date of such reference.
(2) Claims relating to inventions in respect of which no International Search Report has been established shall not be the subject of international preliminary examination.
(3) The Examining Authority, if considers that- (a) the international application relates to a subject matter on which the Examining Authority is not required to carry out an international preliminary examination, and, decides not to carry out such examination; or (b) that the description, the claims, or the drawings, are so unclear, or the claims are so inadequately supported by the description, that no meaningful opinion can be formed on the questions of novelty, inventive step (nonobviousness), or industrial applicability, the Examining Authority shall not go into these questions and shall inform the applicant of this opinion and the reasons therefor.
(4) In a case where any situation referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-rule (3) is found to exist in connection with certain claims only, the Examining Authority shall indicate this fact in the International Preliminary Examination Report in respect of such claims, and for other claims, it shall establish the International Preliminary Examination Report.
(5) Where the Examining Authority finds that the international application does not comply with the requirement of unity of invention, in accordance with the provisions contained in Rule 13 of the regulations under the Treaty and chooses to invite the applicant, at his option, to restrict the claims or to pay additional fees. it shall issue a notice to the applicant:
(a) specifying at least one possibility of restriction which. in the opinion of the Examining Authority. would be in compliance with the applicable requirement;
(b) specifying the reasons for which the international application is not considered as complying with the requirement of unity of invention;
(c) inviting the applicant to comply with the invitation within one month from the date of such notice;
(d) indicating the amount of the required additional fees to be paid in case the applicant so chooses; and (e) inviting the applicant to pay, the protest fee within one month from the date of such notice, and indicate the amount to be paid, as specified in the Fifth Schedule.
(6) Any applicant may pay the additional fees under protest, that is, accompanied by a reasoned statement to the effect that the international application complies with the requirement of unity of invention or that the amount of the required additional fees is excessive.
(7) The examination of the protest referred to in sub-rule {5) shall be carried out by a Review Committee constituted by the Controller.
(8) The Review Committee constituted under sub-rule (7) shall examine the extent to which the protest is justified and shall accordingly order for the total or partial reimbursement to the applicant of the additional fee.
(9) The protest fee shall be refunded to the applicant where the Review Committee referred to in sub-rule (6) finds that the protest was entirely justified.

Rule 19L Period for establishing international preliminary examination report and its transmission.
The period for establishing the International Preliminary Examination Report shall be:
(i)twenty eight months from the priority date; or (ii) six months from the period specified under Rule 69.1 of the regulations under the Treaty for the start of the international preliminary examination;
or (iii) six months from the date of receipt by the Examining Authority of the translation furnished under Rule 55.2 of the regulations under the Treaty, whichever expires last.

Rule 19M Transmittal of the International Preliminary Examination Report.
The Examining Authority shall transmit one copy of the International Preliminary Examination Report and its annexures, if any, to the International Bureau, and one copy to the applicant, on the same day.

Rule 19N Conditions for and extent of refund.
The fee paid by the applicant may be refunded, waived or reduced to the extent and in accordance with the conditions specified in the Treaty or the regulations under the Treaty and the agreement entered between the Indian Patent Office and the International Bureau.

International applications designating or designating and electing India (1) An application corresponding to an international application filed under Patent Cooperation Treaty may be made in Form 1 under sub-section (1A) of section 7.
Explanation.- For the purpose of this rule, "an application corresponding to an international application means an international application as filed under Patent Cooperation Treaty which includes any amendments made by the applicant under Article 19 and communicated to Designated Office under Article 20 or any amendment made under sub-clause (b) of clause (2) of Article 34 of the Treaty:
Provided that the applicant, while filing such application corresponding to an international application designating India, may delete a claim, in accordance with the provisions contained in rule 14.
(2) The Patent Office shall not commence processing of an application filed corresponding to international application designating India before the expiration of the time limit prescribed under sub-rule (4)(i).
(3) An applicant in respect of an international application designating India shall, before the time limit prescribed in sub-rule (4)(i),- (a) pay the prescribed national fee and other fees to the patent office in the manner prescribed under these rules and under the regulations made under the Treaty;
(b) and where the international application was either not filed or has not been published in English, file with the patent office, a translation of the application in English, duly verified by the applicant or the person duly authorised by him that the contents thereof are correct and complete.
(4) (i) The time limit referred to in sub-rule (2) shall be thirty one months from the priority date as referred to in Article 2(xi);
(ii) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (i), the Patent Office may, on the express request filed in Form 18 along with the fee specified in First Schedule, process or examine the application at any time before thirty one months.
(5) The translation of the international application referred to in sub-rule (3) shall include a translation in English of,- (i) the description;
(ii) the claims as filed;
(iii) any text matter of the drawings;
(iv) the abstract; and (v) in case the applicant has not elected India and if the claims have been amended under Article 19, then the amended claims together with any statement filed under the said Article;
(vi) in case the applicant has elected India and any amendments to the description, the claims and text matter of the drawings that are annexed to the international preliminary examination report.
(6) If the applicant fails to file a translation of the amended claims and annexures referred to in sub-rule (5), even after invitation from the appropriate office to do so, within a time limit as may be fixed by that office having regard to the time left for meeting the requirements, the amended claims and annexures shall be disregarded in the course of further processing the application by the appropriate office.
(7) The applicant in respect of an international application designating India shall when complying with sub-rule (3), preferably use Forms set out in the Second Schedule before the appropriate office as designated office.

Filing of priority document (1) Filing of priority document - (1) Where the applicant in respect of an international application designating India has not complied with the requirements of paragraphs (a), (b) or (b-bis) of rule 17.1 of the regulations under the Patent Cooperation Treaty, and subject to paragraph (d) of the said rule 17.1 of regulations under the Treaty, the applicant shall file the priority document referred to in that rule before the expiration of the time limit referred to in sub-rule (4) of rule 20 in the Patent Office.
(2) Where sub-paragraph (i) or sub-paragraph (ii) of paragraph (e) of rule 51bis.1 of the regulations under the Patent Cooperation Treaty is applicable, an English translation thereof duly verified by the applicant or the person duly authorised by him shall be filed within the time limit specified in sub-rule (4) of rule 20.
(3) Where the applicant does not comply with the requirements of sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2), the Patent Office shall invite the applicant to file the priority document or the translation thereof, as the case may be, within three months from the date of such invitation, and if the applicant fails to do so, the claim of the applicant for the priority shall be disregarded for the purposes of the Act.

Effect of non-compliance with certain requirements An international application designating India shall be deemed to be withdrawn if the applicant does not comply with the requirements of rule
20.

The requirements under this Chapter to be supplemental of the regulations, etc., under the Treaty (1)The provisions of this Chapter shall be supplemental to the PCT and the regulation and the administrative instructions made thereunder.
(2) In case of a conflict between any provisions of the rules contained in this Chapter and provisions of the Treaty and the regulations and the administrative instructions made thereunder, the provisions of the Treaty and the regulations and administrative instructions made thereunder shall apply in relation to international applications.

CHAPTER IV PUBLICATION AND EXAMINATION OF APPLICATIONS Publication of application The period for which an application for patent shall not ordinarily be open to public under sub-section (1) ot section 11A shall be eighteen months from the date of filing of application or the date of priority of the application, whichever is earlier Provided that the period within which the Controller shall publish the application in the journal shall ordinarily be one month from the date of expiry of said period, or one month from the date of request for publication under rule 24A.
Request for publication A request for publication under sub-section (2) of section 11 A shall be made in Form 9.
Rule 24B Examination of application (1)(i) A request for examination under section 11B shall be made in Form 18 within forty-eight months from the date of priority of the application or from the date of filing of the application, whichever is earlier;
(ii) The period within which the request for examination under sub-section (3) of section 11B to be made shall be forty-eight months from the date of priority if applicable, or forty-eight months from the date of filing of the application;
(iii) The request for examination under sub-section (4) of section 11B shall be made within forty-eight months from the date of priority or from the date of filing of the application, or within six months from the date of revocation of the secrecy direction, whichever is later;
(iv) The request for examination of application as filed according to the 'Explanation' under sub-section (3) of section 16 shall be made within forty-eight months from the date of filing of the application or from the date of priority of the first mentioned application or within six months from the date of filing of the further application, whichever is later;
(v) The period for making request for examination under section 11B of the applications filed before the 1st day of January, 2005 shall be the period specified under the section 11B before the' commencement of the Patents (Amendment) Act, 2005 or the period specified under these rules, whichever expires later.
(2) (i) Where the request for examination has been filed under sub-rule (1) and application has been published under section 11A, the Controller shall refer the application, specification and other documents related thereto to the examiner and such reference shall be made in the order in which the request is filed:
Provided that in case of a further application filed under section 16, the order of reference of such further application shall be the same as that of the first mentioned application:
Provided further that in case the first mentioned application has already been referred for examination, the further application shall have to be accompanied by a request for examination, and such further application shall be published within one month and be referred to the examiner within one month from the date of such publication.
(ii) The period within which the examiner shall make the report under sub-section (2) of section 12, shall ordinarily be one month but not exceeding three months from the date of reference of the application to him by the Controller;
(iii) the period within which the Controller shall dispose off the report of the examiner shall ordinarily be one month from the date of the receipt of the such report by the Controller.
(3) A first statement of objections, along with any documents as may be required, shall be issued by the Controller to the applicant or his authorised agent within one month from the date of disposal of the report of examiner by the Controller: Provided that where the request for examination was filed by a person interested, only an intimation of such examination may be sent to such person interested.

(4) Reply to the first statement of objections and subsequent reply, if any, shall be processed in the order in which such reply is received.
(5) The time for putting an application in order for grant under section 21 shall be six months from the date on which the first statement of objections is issued to the applicant to comply with the requirements.
(6) The time for putting an application in order for grant under section 21 as prescribed under sub-rule (5) may be further extended for a period of three months on a request in Form 4 for extension of time along with prescribed fee, made to the Controller before expiry of the period specified under sub-rule (5).

Rule 24C Expedited examination of applications (1)An applicant may file a request for expedited examination in Form 18A along with the fee as specified in the first schedule only by electronic transmission duly authenticated within the period prescribed in rule 24B on any of the following grounds, namely: (a) that India has been indicated as the competent International Searching Authority or elected as an International Preliminary Examining Authority in the corresponding international application; or (b) that the applicant is a startup; or (c) that the applicant is a small entity; or (d) that if the applicant is a natural person or in the case of joint applicants, all the applicants are natural persons, then the applicant or at least one of the applicants is a female; or (e) that the applicant is a department of the Government; or (f) that the applicant is an institution established by a Central, Provincial or State Act, which is owned or controlled by the Government; or (g) that the applicant is a Government company as defined in clause (45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013); or (h) that the applicant is an institution wholly or substantially financed by the Government; Explanation:- For the purpose of this clause, the term 'substantially financed' shall have the same meaning as in the Explanation to sub-section (1) of section 14 of the Comptroller and Auditor General's (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971(56 of 1971); or (i) that the application pertains to a sector which is notified by the Central Government on the basis of a request from the head of a department of the Central Government.: Provided that public comments are invited before any such notification; or (j) that the applicant is eligible under an arrangement for processing a patent application pursuant to an agreement between Indian Patent Office and a foreign Patent Office. Explanation:- The patentability of patent applications filed under clause (j) above will be in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Act.
(2) A request for examination filed under rule 24B may be converted to a request for expedited examination under sub-rule (1) of rule 24C by paying the relevant fees and submitting requisite documents as required under sub-rule (1).
(3) Except where the application has already been published under sub-section (2) of section 11A or a request for publication under rule 24A has already been filed, a request for expedited examination shall be accompanied by a request for publication under rule 24A.
(4) Where the request for expedited examination does not comply with the requirements of this rule, such a request shall be processed in accordance with the provisions contained in rule 24B, with an intimation to the applicant, and shall be deemed to have been filed on the date on which the request for expedited examination was filed.
(5)The Controller shall refer the request for expedited examination along with the application and specification and other documents to the examiner, in respect of the applications where the request for expedited examination has been received, in the order of filing of such requests.
Provided that a request for expedited examination under this rule filed by a startup or small entity shall not be questioned merely on the ground that the startup or small entity, having filed an application for a patent, ceases to be a startup or small entity due to the lapse of the period during which it is recognised by the competent authority, or its turnover subsequently crosses the financial threshold limit as notified by the competent authority.
(6) The period within which the examiner shall make the report under sub-section (2) of section 12, shall ordinarily be one month but not exceeding two months from the date of reference of the application to him by the Controller.
(7) The period within which the Controller shall dispose of the report of the examiner shall be one month from the date of receipt of such report by the Controller.
(8) A first statement of objections along with any document, if required, shall be issued by the Controller to the applicant or his authorised agent within fifteen days from the date of disposal of the report of examiner by the Controller.
(9) Reply to the first statement of objections and subsequent reply, if any, in respect of an application where the request for expedited examination was filed, shall be processed in the order in which such reply for such application is received.
(10) The time for putting an application in order for grant under section 21 shall be six months from the date on which the first statement of objections is issued to the applicant.
(11) The time for putting an application in order for grant under section 21, as prescribed in sub-rule (10) may be further extended for a period of three months on a request for extension made in Form 4 along with the prescribed fee, made to the Controller before the expiry of the period specified under sub-rule (10).
(12) The Controller shall dispose of the application within a period of three months from the date of receipt of the last reply to the first statement of objections or within a period of three months from the last date to put the application in order for grant under section 21 of the Act, whichever is earlier: Provided that this time limit shall not be applicable in case of pre-grant opposition.
(13) Notwithstanding anything contained this rule, the Controller may limit the number of requests for expedited examination to be received

during the year by way of a notice to be published in the official journal.

Identification of published applications Publication of application under sub-sections (2) and (5) of section 11A shall be identified by the letter 'A' along with the number of application.

Request for withdrawal A request for withdrawing the application under sub-section (4) of section 11B shall be made in Form 29.

Inspection and supply of published documents After the date of publication of the application under section 11A, the application together with the complete specification and provisional specification, if any, the drawing, if any, the abstract and any other document filed in respect of the application may be inspected at the appropriate office by making a written request to the Controller on payment of the fee in that behalf and copies thereof may be obtained on payment of fees specified in the First Schedule.

Procedure in case of anticipation by prior publication (1) If the Controller is satisfied after investigation under section 13 that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification has been published in any specification or other document referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of the said section, the Controller shall communicate the gist of specific objections and the basis thereof to the applicant and the applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to amend his specification.
(2) If the applicant contests any of the objections communicated to him by the Controller under sub-rule (1), or if he refiles his specification along with his observations as to whether or not the specification is to be amended, he shall be given an opportunity to be heard in the matter if he so requests:
Provided that such request shall be made on a date earlier than ten days of the final date of the period preferred to under sub-section (1) of section 21:
Provided further that a request for hearing may be allowed to be filed within such shorter period as the Controller may deem fit in the circumstances of the case.
(3) If the applicant requests for a hearing under sub-rule (2) within a period of one month from the date of communication of the gist of objections, or, the Controller, considers it desirable to do so, whether or not the applicant has refiled his application, he shall forthwith fix a date and time for hearing having regard to the period remaining for putting the application in order or to the other circumstances of the case.
(4) The applicant shall be given ten days' notice of any such hearing or such shorter notice as appears to the Controller to be reasonable in the circumstances of the case and the applicant shall, as soon as possible, notify the Controller whether he will attend the hearing.
(5) After hearing the applicant, or without a hearing if the applicant has not attended or has notified that he does not desire to be heard, the Controller may specify or permit such amendment of the specification as he thinks fit to be made and may refuse to grant the patent unless the amendment so specified or permitted is made within such period as may be fixed.
(6) The hearing may also be held through video-conferencing or audio-visual communication devices: Provided that such hearing shall be deemed to have taken place at the appropriate office.
Explanation.– For the purposes of this rule, the expression communication device shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (ha) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000).
(7) In all cases of hearing, written submissions and the relevant documents, if any, shall be filed within fifteen days from the date of hearing.
Procedure in relation to consideration of report of examiner under section 14 In case the applicant contests any of the objections communicated to him, the procedure specified under rule 28 may apply.

Procedure in case of anticipation by prior claiming (1) When it is found that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification, is claimed in any claim of any other specification falling within clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 13, the applicant shall be so informed and shall be afforded an opportunity to amend his specification.
(2) If the applicant's specification is otherwise in order for grant and an objection under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 13 is outstanding, the Controller may postpone the grant of patent and allow a period of two months for removing the objection.

Amendment of the complete specification in case of anticipation (1) If the applicant so requests at any time, or if the Controller is satisfied that the objection has not been removed within the period referred to in sub-rule (2) of rule 29, a date for hearing the applicant shall be fixed forthwith and the applicant shall be given at least ten days' notice of the date so fixed. The applicant shall, as soon as possible, notify the Controller whether he will attend the hearing.
(2) After hearing the applicant, or without a hearing if the applicant has not attended or has notified that he does not desire to be heard, the Controller may specify or permit such amendment of the specification as will be to his satisfaction to be made and may direct that reference to such other specification, as he shall mention shall be inserted in the applicant's specification unless the amendment is made or agreed to within such period as he may fix.

Form of reference to another specification When in pursuance of rule 30, the Controller directs that a reference to another specification shall be inserted in the applicant's complete specification, such reference shall be inserted after the claims and shall be in the following form, namely:
"Reference has been directed, in pursuance of section 18(2) of the Patents Act, 1970, to the specification filed in pursuance of application No..."

Procedure in case of potential infringement If in consequence of an investigation made under section 13, it appears to the Controller that the applicant's invention cannot be performed without substantial risk of infringement of a claim of another patent, the applicant shall be so informed and the procedure provided in rule 29 shall, so far as may be necessary, be applicable.

Form of reference to another patent Where the Controller directs that a reference to another patent shall be inserted in the applicant's complete specification under sub-section (1) of section 19, such reference shall be inserted, after the claims in the following form, namely:
"Reference has been directed, in pursuance of section 19(1) of the Patents Act, 1970, to Patent No..."

Manner in which a claim under section 20(1) shall be made (1) A claim under sub-section (1) of section 20 shall be made in Form 6.
(2) The original assignment or agreement or an official copy or notarized copy thereof shall also be produced for the Controller's inspection and the Controller may call for such other proof of title or written consent as he may require.

Manner in which a request may be made under section 20(4) (1) A request under sub-section (4) of section 20 shall be made in Form 6.
(2) The request shall be accompanied by proof of death of the joint applicant and a certified copy of the probate of the will of the deceased or letters of administration in respect of his estate or any other document to prove that the person who gives the consent is the legal representative of the deceased applicant.

Manner of application under section 20(5) (1) An application under sub-section (5) of section 20 shall be made in Form 6 in duplicate and shall be accompanied by a statement setting out fully the facts upon which the applicant relies and the directions which he seeks.
(2) A copy of the application and statement shall be sent by the Controller to every other joint applicant.

Numbering of applications on the grant of patent On the grant of a patent, the application shall be accorded a number (called serial number) in the series of numbers accorded to patents under the Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911 (2 of 1911), which shall be the number of the patent so granted.

CHAPTER VI OPPOSITION PROCEEDINGS TO GRANT OF PATENTS Opposition to the patent (1) Representation for opposition under sub-section (1) of section 25 shall be filed in Form 7(A) at the appropriate office with a copy to the applicant, and shall include a statement and evidence, if any, in support of the representation and a request for hearing, if so desired.
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), no patent shall be granted before the expiry of a period of six months from the date of publication of the application under section 11 A.
(2) The Controller shall consider such representation only when a request for examination of the application has been filed.
(3) On consideration of the representation if the Controller is of the opinion that application for patent shall be refused or the complete specification requires amendment, he shall give a notice to the applicant to that effect.
(4) On receiving the notice under sub-rule (3), the applicant shall, if he so desires, file his statement and evidence, if any, in support of his application within three months from the date of the notice, with a copy to the opponent.
(5) On consideration of the statement and evidence filed by the applicant, the representation including the statement and evidence filed by the opponent, submissions made by the parties, and after hearing the parties, if so requested, the Controller may either reject the representation or require the complete specification and other documents to be amended to his satisfaction before the patent is granted or refuse to grant a patent on the application, by passing a speaking order to simultaneously decide on the application and the representation ordinarily within one month from the completion of above proceedings.
(6) [omitted] Filing of notice of opposition The notice of opposition to be given under sub-section (2) of section 25 shall be made in Form 7 and sent to the Controller in duplicate at the appropriate office.

Constitution of Opposition Board and its proceeding (1) On receipt of notice of opposition under rule 55A, the Controller shall, by order, constitute an Opposition Board consisting of three members and nominate one of the members as the Chairman of the Board.
(2) An examiner appointed under sub-section (2) of section 73 shall be eligible to be a member of the Opposition Board.
(3) The examiner, who has dealt with the application for patent during the proceeding for grant of patent thereon shall not be eligible as member of Opposition Board as specified in sub-rule (2) for that application.
(4) The Opposition Board shall conduct the examination of the notice of opposition along with documents filed under rules 57 to 60 referred to under sub-section (3) of section 25, submit a report with reasons on each ground taken in the notice of opposition with its joint recommendation within three months from the date on which the documents were forwarded to them.

Filing of written statement of opposition and evidence The opponent shall send a written statement in duplicate setting out the nature of the opponent's interest, the facts upon which he bases his case and relief which he seeks and evidence, if any, along with notice of opposition and shall deliver to the patentee a copy of the statement and the evidence, if any.

Filing of reply statement and evidence (1) If the patentee desires to contest the opposition, he shall leave at the appropriate office a reply statement setting out fully the grounds upon which the opposition is contested and evidence, if any, in support of his case within a period of two months from the date of receipt of the copy of the written statement and Opponent's evidence, if any by him under rule 57 and deliver to the opponent a copy thereof.
(2) If the patentee does not desire to contest or leave his reply and evidence within the period as specified in sub-rule (1), the patent shall be deemed to have been revoked.

Filing of reply evidence by opponent The opponent may, within one month from the date of delivery to him of a copy or the patentee's reply statement and evidence under rule 58, leave at the appropriate office evidence in reply strictly confined to matters in the patentee's evidence and shall deliver to the patentee a copy of such evidence.

Further evidence to be left with the leave of the Controller No further evidence shall be delivered by either party except with the leave or directions of the Controller:
Provided that such leave or direction is prayed before the Controller has fixed the hearing under rule 62.

Copies of documents to be supplied (1) Copies of all documents referred to in the notice of opposition or in any statement or evidence filed in connection with the opposition and authenticated to the satisfaction of the Controller, shall be simultaneously furnished in duplicate unless the Controller otherwise directs.
(2) Where a specification or other document in a language other than English is referred to in the notice, statement or evidence, an attested translation thereof, in duplicate, in English shall be furnished along with such notice, statement or evidence, as the case may be.

Hearing (1) On the completion of the presentation of evidence, if any, and on receiving the recommendation of Opposition Board or at such other time as the Controller may think fit, he shall fix a date and time for the hearing of the opposition and shall give the parties not less than ten days' notice of such hearing and may require members of Opposition Board to be present in the hearing.
(2) If either party to the proceeding desires to be heard, he shall inform the Controller by a notice along with the fee as specified in the First Schedule.
(3) The Controller may refuse to hear any party who has not given notice under sub-rule (2).
(4) If either party intends to rely on any publication at the hearing not already mentioned in the notice, statement or evidence, he shall give to the other party and to the Controller not less than five days' notice of his intention, together with details of such publication.
(5) After hearing the party or parties desirous of being heard, or if neither party desires to be heard, then without a hearing, and after taking into consideration the recommendation of Opposition Board, the Controller shall decide the opposition and notify his decision to the parties giving reasons therefor.

Determination of costs If the patentee notifies the Controller that he desires to withdraw the patent after notice of opposition is given, the Controller, depending on the merits of the case, may decide whether costs should be awarded to the opponent.
Request made under section 26(1) Request under section 26(1) shall be made on Form 12 within three months from the date of the order of the Controller and shall be accompanied by a statement setting out the facts upon which the petitioner relies and relief he claims.

Form of making a request under section 28(2) A request under sub-section (2) of section 28 shall be made in Form 8.

Form of making a claim under section 28(3) (1) A claim under sub-section (3) of section 28 shall be made in Form 8, and shall be accompanied by a statement setting out the circumstances under which the claim is made.
(2) A copy of the claim and the statement shall be sent by the Controller to every applicant for the patent (not being the claimant) and to any other person whom the Controller may consider to be interested.

Form of application to be made under section 28(7) (1) An application under sub-section (7) of section 28 shall be made in Form 8 and shall be accompanied by a statement setting out the circumstances under which the application is made.
(2) A copy of the application and the statement shall be sent by the Controller to each patentee or the applicant for patent, as the case may be, and to any other person whom the Controller may consider to be interested.

Procedure for the hearing of claim or an application under section 28 The procedure specified in rules 55A and 57 to 63 relating to the filing of notice of opposition, written statement, reply statement, leaving evidence, hearing and cost shall, so far as may be, apply to the hearing of a claim or an application under section 28 as they apply to the opposition proceedings subject to the modification that reference to patentee shall be construed as the person making the claim, or an application, as the case may be.

Mention of inventor Any mention of the inventor under sub-section (1) of section 28 shall be made in the relevant documents in the following form namely:- "The inventor of this invention/substantial part of this invention within the meaning of section 28 of the Patents Act, 1970, is ... of ...".

CHAPTER VII SECRECY DIRECTIONS Permission for making patent application outside India under section 39 (1) The request for permission for making patent application outside India shall be made in Form 25.
(2) The Controller shall dispose of the request made under sub-rule (1) within a period of twenty-one days from the date of filing of such request: Provided that in case of inventions relating to defence or atomic energy, the period of twenty-one days shall be counted from the date of receipt of consent from the Central Government.

Communication of result of reconsideration under section 36(2) (1) The result of every reconsideration under sub-section (1) of section 36 shall be communicated to the applicant for patent within fifteen days of the receipt of the notice by the Controller.
(2) Extension of time on revocation of secrecy directions under section 38.-The extension of time to be given for doing anything required or authorised to be done under section 38 shall not exceed the period for which directions given by the Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 35 were in force.

CHAPTER VIII GRANT OF PATENTS Form of patent (1) A patent shall be in the form as specified in the Third Schedule with such modifications as the circumstances of each case may require and shall bear the number accorded to the application under rule 37.
(2) The patent certificate shall ordinarily be issued within seven days from the date of grant of patent uner section 43.
Inspection of documents related to grant of patent After the date of publication of a grant of a patent, the application together with the complete specification and provisional specification, if any, the drawing if any, abstract and other documents related thereto may be inspected at the appropriate office by making a written request to the Controller and on payment of fee and may obtain copies on payment of fee specified in the First Schedule.

Amendment of patent under section 44 An application under section 44 for the amendment of a patent shall be made in Form 10 along with substantiating evidence and be accompanied by the patent.

Manner of applying for direction under section 51(1) (1) An application for directions under sub-section (1) of section 51 shall be made in Form 11 and shall be accompanied by a statement setting out the facts upon which the applicant relies.
(2) A copy of the application and of the statement shall be sent by the Controller to every other person registered as grantee or proprietor of the patent.

Manner of application under section 51(2) (1) An application for directions under sub-section (2) of section 51 shall be made in Form 11 and shall be accompanied by a statement setting out the facts upon which the applicant relies.
(2) A copy of the application and statement shall be sent by the Controller to the person in default.

Procedure for the hearing of proceedings under section 51 The procedure specified in rules 55A and 57 to 63 relating to the filing of notice of opposition, written statement, reply statement, leaving evidence, hearing and costs shall, so far as may be, apply to the hearing of an application under section 51 as they apply to the hearing of an opposition proceeding.

Request under section 52(2) (1) A request under sub-section (2) of section 52 shall be made in Form 12 within three months from the date of the order of the Appellate Board or court referred to in sub-section (1) of the said section and shall be accompanied by a statement setting out the facts upon which the petitioner relies and the relief he claims and a certified copy of the order of the Appellate Board or court.
(2) Where the Appellate Board or court has ordered the grant of patent to the applicant only for a part of the invention, the new patent granted shall be accorded a number in the same series of numbers accorded to the complete specifications accepted on the same day as the patent is granted.

Renewal fees under section 53 (1) To keep a patent in force, the renewal fees specified in the First Schedule shall be payable at the expiration of the second year from the date of the patent or of any succeeding year and the same shall be remitted to the patent office before the expiration or the second or the succeeding year.
(1A) The period for payment of renewal fees so specified in sub-rule (1) may be extended to such period not being more than six months if the request for such extension of time is made in Form 4 with the fee specified in the First Schedule.
(2) While paying the renewal fee, the number and date of the patent concerned and the year in respect of which the fee is paid shall be quoted.
(3) The annual renewal fees payable in respect of two or more years may be paid in advance.
(4) The Controller shall, after making such enquiry as he may deem necessary, credit any renewal fee and issue a certificate that the fee has been paid.

CHAPTER IX AMENDMENT OF APPLICATION, SPECIFICATION OR ANY DOCUMENT RELATING THERETO Amendment of application, specification or any document relating thereto (1) An application under section 57 for the amendment of an application for a patent or a complete specification or any document related thereto shall be made in Form 13.
(2) If the application for amendment under sub-rule (1) relates to an application for a patent which has not been granted, the Controller shall determine whether and subject to what conditions, if any, the amendment shall be allowed.
(3) (a) If the application for amendment under sub-rule (1) is made after grant of patent and the nature of the proposed amendment is substantive, the application shall be published.
(b) Any person interested in opposing the application for amendment shall give a notice of opposition in Form 14 within three months from the date of publication of the application.
(c) The procedure specified in rules 57 to 63 relating to the filing of written statement, reply statement, leaving evidence, hearing and costs shall, so far as may be, apply to the hearing of the opposition under section 57 as they apply to the hearing of an opposition proceeding.

Preparation of amended specifications, etc.
Where the Controller allows the application for a patent or the complete specification or any other document to be amended, the applicant shall, if the Controller so requires and within the time to be specified by him, leave at the appropriate office an amended application or the specification or the other document, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of these rules.

Publication of the amendment allowed The amendments allowed after a patent has been granted, shall be published.

CHAPTER X RESTORATION OF PATENTS Restoration of patents (1) An application for the restoration of a patent under section 60 shall be made in Form 15.
(2) Where the Controller is satisfied that a prima facie case for the restoration of any patent has not been made out, he shall intimate the applicant accordingly and unless the applicant makes a request to be heard in the matter within one month from the date of such intimation, the Controller shall refuse the application.
(3) Where applicant requests for a hearing within the time allowed and the Controller, after giving the applicant such a hearing, is prima facie satisfied that the failure to pay the renewal fees was unintentional, he shall publish the application.

Opposition to restoration under section 61 (1) At any time, within two months from the date of publication of the application under sub-rule (3) of rule 84, any person interested may give notice of opposition thereto in Form 14.
(2) A copy of the notice of opposition shall be sent by the Controller to the applicant.
(3) The procedure specified in rules 57 to 63 relating to the filing of written statement, reply statement, leaving evidence, hearing and costs shall, so far as may be, apply to the hearing of the opposition under section 60 as they apply to the hearing in the opposition proceeding.

Payment of unpaid renewal fees (1) Where the Controller decides in favour of the applicant, the applicant shall pay the unpaid renewal fees and the additional fee specified in the First Schedule, within a month from the date of the order of the Controller allowing the application for restoration.
(2) The Controller shall publish his decision.

CHAPTER XI SURRENDER OF PATENTS Surrender of Patents (1) The Controller shall publish the notice of an offer given under section 63.
(2) Any person interested may, within three months from the date of publication of the notice, give notice of opposition to the Controller in Form 14 in duplicate.
(3) The procedure specified in rules 57 to 63 relating to the filing of written statement, reply statement, leaving evidence, hearing and costs shall, so far as may be, apply to the hearing of the opposition under section 63 as they apply to the hearing in opposition proceeding.
(4) If the Controller accepts the patentee's offer to surrender the patent, he may direct the patentee to return the patent, and on receipt of such patent, the Controller shall by order revoke it and publish the revocation of the patent.

CHAPTER XII REGISTER OF PATENTS Register of patents under section 67 (1) Upon the grant of a patent, the Controller shall enter in the register of patents at each appropriate office, the name, address and nationality of the grantee as the patentee thereof, the title of the invention (including the categories to which the invention relates), the date of the patent and the date of grant thereof together with the address for service of the patentee.
(2) The Controller shall also enter in the register of patents particulars regarding proceedings under the Act before the Controller or Appellate Board or the courts in respect of every patent.
(3) Where the register of patents or any part thereof is in computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form it shall be maintained and accessed only by the person who is duly authorised by the Controller and no entry or alteration of any entry or rectification of any entry in the said register shall be made by any person who is not so authorised by the Controller.

Registration of title and interest in patents (1) An application referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 69 shall be made in Form 16.
(2) An application for an entry in the register of patents of any other document purporting to affect the proprietorship of the patent by the person benefiting under the document shall be made in Form 16.

Presentation of assignment, etc., of patent to Controller Every assignment and every other document giving effect to or being evidence of the transfer of a patent or affecting the proprietorship thereof or creating an interest therein as claimed in such application, shall, unless the Controller otherwise directs, be presented to him together with the application which shall be accompanied by two copies of the assignment or other document certified to be true copies by the applicant or his agent and the Controller may call for such other proof of title or written consent as he may require.

Registration of title or interest in a patent After the receipt of an application under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 69, the Controller shall register the title of the person concerned or his interest in a patent, as the case may be, and an entry in the following form shall be made in the register, namely:- "In pursuance of an application received on the... Proprietor...Assignment...registered as...licencee... by virtue of...licence...Mortgagee etc... Mortgage deed etc...dated...and made between...of the one part and...of the other part."

Entry of renewal fee Upon receipt of the payment of the prescribed renewal fee in respect of a patent, the Controller shall enter in the register of patents the fact that the fee has been paid and the date of payment of such fee and issue a certificate of renewal of the patent.

Alteration of address (1) A patentee may make a request in writing along with fee payable to the Controller for the alteration of his name, nationality, address or address for service as entered in the register of patents in respect of any patent granted to him. The Controller may require such proof of the alteration as he may think fit before acting on a request to alter the name or nationality.
(2) If the Controller allows a request made under sub-rule (1), he shall cause the entries in the register to be altered accordingly.
(3) If a patentee makes a request in writing along with fee payable for entering an additional address for service in India and if the Controller is satisfied that the request should be allowed, he shall have the additional address for service entered in the register.

Inspection of register of patents under section 72 and fees payable therefor (1) The register of patents shall be open for public inspection during office hours on payment of the fees specified therefor in the First Schedule.
(2) When register of patents or any part thereof is in computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form the person authorised by the Controller under sub-rule (3) of rule 88 shall provide access to the computer floppies, diskettes or other electronic form or printouts of the records thereof.

CHAPTER XIII COMPULSORY LICENCE AND REVOCATION OF PATENT Application for compulsory licence etc.
An application to the Controller for an order under section 84, section 85, section 91 or section 92 or section 92A shall be in Form 17, or Form 19, as the case may be. Except in the case of an application made by the Central Government, the application shall set out the nature of the applicant's interest and terms and conditions of the licence the applicant is willing to accept.

When a prima facie case is not made out (1) If, upon consideration of the evidence, the Controller is satisfied that a prima facie case has not been made out for the making of an order under any of the sections referred to in rule 96, he shall notify the applicant accordingly, and unless the applicant requests to be heard in the matter, within one month from the date of such notification, the Controller shall refuse the application.
(2) If the applicant requests for a hearing within the time allowed under sub-rule (1), the Controller shall, after giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard, determine whether the application may be proceeded with or whether it shall be refused.

Notice of opposition under section 87(2) (1) A notice of opposition under sub-section (2) of section 87 shall be given in Form 14 and shall be sent to the Controller within two months from the date of the publication of the application under sub-section (1) of the said section.
(2) The notice of opposition referred to in sub-rule (1) shall include the terms and conditions of the licence, if any, the opponent is prepared to grant to the applicant and shall be accompanied by evidence in support of the opposition.
(3) The opponent shall serve a copy of his notice of opposition and evidence on the applicant and notify the Controller when such service has been effected.
(4) No further statement or evidence shall be delivered by either party except with the leave of or on requisition by the Controller.
(5) The Controller shall forthwith fix a date and time for the hearing of the case and shall give the parties not less than ten days' notice of such hearing.
(6) The procedure specified in sub-rules (2) to (5) of rule 62, shall, so far as may be, apply to the procedure for hearing under this rule as they apply to the hearing in opposition proceedings.

Manner of publication of the revocation order The Controller shall publish the order made by him under sub-section (3) of section 85 revoking a patent.

Application under section 88(4) (1) An application under sub-section (4) of section 88 for the revision of the terms and conditions of a licence which have been settled by the Controller shall be in Form 20 and shall state the facts relied upon by the applicant and the relief he seeks and shall be accompanied by evidence in support of the application.
(2) If the Controller is satisfied that a prima facie case has not been made out for the revision of the terms and conditions of the licence, he may notify the applicant accordingly and unless within a month the applicant requests to be heard in the matter, the Controller may refuse the application.
(3) The Controller, after giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard, shall determine whether the application shall be proceeded with or whether the application shall be refused.

Procedure to be followed in case of applications under section 88(4) (1) If the Controller allows the application to be proceeded with, he shall direct the applicant to serve copies of the application and of the evidence in support thereof upon the patentee or any other person appearing in the register to be interested in the patent or upon any other person on whom, in his opinion such copies should be so served.
(2) The applicant shall inform the Controller the date on which the service of copies of application and of the evidence on the patentee and other persons referred to in sub-rule (1) has been effected.
(3) The patentee or any other person on whom copies of the application and of the evidence have been served, may give to the Controller notice of opposition in Form 14 within one month from the date of such service. Such notice shall contain the grounds relied upon by the opponent and shall be accompanied by evidence in support of the opposition.
(4) The opponent shall serve copies of the notice of opposition and his evidence on the applicant and inform the Controller the date on which such service has been effected.
(5) No further evidence or statement shall be filed by either party except with special leave of or on requisition by the Controller.
(6) On completion of the above proceedings, the Controller shall forthwith fix a date and the time for the hearing of the case and shall give the parties not less than ten days' notice of such hearing.
(7) The procedure specified in sub-rules (2) to (5) of rule 62 shall, so far as may be, apply to the procedure for hearing under this rule as they apply to the hearing in opposition proceedings.
(8) If the Controller decides to revise the terms and conditions of licence he shall forthwith amend the licence granted to the applicant in such manner, as he may deem necessary.

Application for termination of compulsory licence under section 94 (1) An application for termination of compulsory licence under section 94(1) shall be made in Form 21 by the patentee or any other person deriving title or interest in the patent. The application shall be accompanied by the evidence in support of the application.
(2) The applicant shall serve a copy of the application and evidence on the holder of the compulsory licence and shall inform the Controller the date on which the service has been effected.
(3) The holder of the compulsory licence may file his objection along with evidence, if any, to the application within one month from the date of receipt of the application and evidence by him to the Controller and serve a copy thereof to the applicant.
(4) No further evidence or statement shall be filed by either party except with special leave of or on requisition by the Controller.
(5) On completion of the above proceedings, the Controller shall forthwith fix a date and the time for the hearing of the case and shall give the parties not less than ten days' notice of such hearing.
(6) The procedure specified in sub-rules (2) to (5) of rule 62 so far as may be, apply to the procedure for hearing under this rule as they apply to the hearing in opposition proceedings.
(7) If the Controller decides to terminate the compulsory licence he shall forthwith issue an order giving terms and conditions, if any, of such termination and serve copies of the order to both the parties.

CHAPTER XIV SCIENTIFIC ADVISERS Roll of scientific advisers (1) The Controller shall maintain a roll of scientific advisers for the purpose of section 115. The roll shall be updated annually. The roll shall contain the names, addresses, specimen signatures and photographs of scientific advisers, their designations, information regarding their educational qualifications, the disciplines of their specialisation and their technical, practical and research experience.
(2) A person shall be qualified to have his name entered in the roll of scientific advisers, if he- (i) holds a degree in science, engineering or technology or equivalent;
(ii) has at least fifteen years' technical, practical or research experience; and (iii) he holds or has held a responsible post in a scientific or technical department of the Central or State Government or in any organisation.

Disqualifications for inclusion in the roll of scientific advisers A person shall not be eligible to be included in the roll of scientific advisors, if he (i)has been adjudged by a competent court to be of unsound mind;
(ii) is an undischarged insolvent;
(iii) being a discharged insolvent, has not obtained from the court a certificate to the effect that his insolvency was caused by misfortune without any misconduct on his part;
(iv) has been convicted by a competent court, whether within or outside India of an offence to undergo a term of imprisonment, unless the offence of which he has been convicted has been pardoned or unless on an application made by him, the Central Government has, by order in this behalf, removed the disability; or (v) has been guilty of professional misconduct.

Manner of application for inclusion in the roll of scientific advisers Any interested person may apply to the Controller for inclusion of his name in the roll of scientific advisers by furnishing his bio-data.

Inclusion of the name of any other person in the roll of scientific advisers The Controller may, notwithstanding anything contained in rules 103 and 104, enter the name of any person in the roll of scientific advisers, if he is of the opinion after such inquiry as he deems fit, that such person should be entered in the roll of scientific advisers.

Power to relax Where the Controller is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do, he may, by order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, relax any of the qualifications specified in sub-rule (2) of rule 103 with respect to any person, if such person is otherwise well qualified.

Removal of names from the roll of scientific advisers The Controller may remove the name of any person from the roll of scientific advisers, if- (a) such person makes a request for such removal; or (b) the Controller is satisfied that his name has been entered in the roll by error or on account of misrepresentation or suppression of any material fact; or (c) such person has been convicted of an offence and sentenced to a term of imprisonment or has been guilty of misconduct in his professional capacity and the Controller is of the opinion that his name should be removed from the roll; or (d) such person is dead: Provided that except in the cases falling under clause (a) and (d) above, before removing the name of any person from the roll of scientific advisers under this rule, such person shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.

CHAPTER XV PATENT AGENTS Particulars to be contained in the register of patent agents (1) The register of patent agents maintained under section 125 shall contain the name, nationality, address of the principal place of business, addresses of branch offices, if any, the qualifications, the date of registration of every registered patent agent and the details of their renewal of registration and any other particulars so specified by the Controller.
(2) Where the register of patent agents is in computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form, it shall be maintained and accessed only by the person who is duly authorised by the Controller and no entry or alteration of any entry or rectification of any entry in the said register shall be made by any person who is not so authorised by the Controller.
(3) (i) Copies of register of patent agents shall be maintained in each of the branch offices;
(ii) The register of patent agents shall also contain specimen signatures and photographs of the persons registered as patent agents.

Application for registration of patent agents (1) Every person who desires to be registered as a patent agent shall make an application in Form 22.
(2) The applicant shall furnish such other information as may be required by the Controller.
(3) A person desirous to appear in the qualifying examination under rule 110 shall make a request to the Controller along with the fee specified in the First Schedule after announcement of such examination and within the period as may be specified in the announcement.

Particulars of the qualifying examination for patent agents (1) The qualifying examination referred to in clause (c) (ii) of sub-section (1) of section 126 shall consist of a written test and a viva voce examination.
(2) The qualifying examination shall consist of the following papers and marks, namely:
Paper I -Patents Act and Rules 100 Paper II-Drafting and interpretation of patent specifications and other documents 100 Viva Voce 50 (3) A candidate shall be required to secure a minimum of fifty marks in paper I and paper II and shall be declared to have passed the examination only, if he obtains an aggregate of sixty percent of the total marks.

Registration of patent agents After a candidate passes the qualifying examination specified in rule 110 and after obtaining any further information which the Controller considers necessary he shall, on receipt of the fee specified therefor in the First Schedule, enter the candidate's name in the register of patent agents and issue to him a certificate of registration as a patent agent.
Issue of duplicate certificate of patent agents The Controller may issue a duplicate certificate of registration as patent agent on a request made by the person so registered as patent agent along with fee specified in the First Schedule and contain a statement setting out the circumstances in which the original certificate issued under rule 111 was lost, destroyed and cannot be produced.

Details to be included in an application for the registration of a patent agent An application by a person entitled to be registered as a patent agent under sub-section (2) of section 126 shall also be made in Form 22.

Registration of patent agents under section 126 (2) On receipt of an application for the registration of a person as a patent agent under rule 112, the Controller may if he is satisfied that the said person fulfils the conditions specified in sub-section (2) of section 126 enter his name in the register of patent agents.

Disqualifications for registration as a patent agent A person shall not be eligible to be registered as a patent agent, if he- (i) has been adjudged by a competent court to be of unsound mind;
(ii) is an undischarged insolvent;
(iii) being a discharged insolvent, has not obtained from the court a certificate to the effect that his insolvency was caused by misfortune without any misconduct on his part;
(iv) has been convicted by a competent court, whether within or outside India of an offence to undergo a term of imprisonment, unless the offence of which he has been convicted has been pardoned or unless on an application made by him, the Central Government has, by order in this behalf, removed the disability;
(v) being a legal practitioner has been guilty of professional misconduct; or (vi) being a chartered accountant, has been guilty of negligence or misconduct.

Payment of fees The continuance of a person's name in the register of patent agents shall be subject to the payment of the fees specified therefor in the First Schedule.

Removal of a name from the register of patent agents (1) The Controller may delete from the register of patent agents, the name of any patent agent- (a) from whom a request has been received to that effect; or (b) when he is dead; or (c) when the Controller has removed the name of a person under sub¬section (1) of section 130; or (d) if he has defaulted in the payment of fees specified in rule 115, by more than three months after they are due; or (e) if he ceases to be a citizen of India:
Provided that except under clause (a) and (b), before removing the name of any person from the register of patent agents under this rule, such person shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(2) The removal of the name of any person from the register of patent agents shall be published and shall be, where relevant forthwith communicated to the person concerned.

Restoration of name of persons removed from the register of patent agents (1) An application for the restoration of the name of any person removed from the register of patent agents under sub-section (2) of section 130 shall be made in Form 23 within two months from the date of such removal.
(2) If the name of a person is restored to the register of patent agents, his name shall be continued therein for a period of one year from the date on which his last annual fee became due.
(3) The restoration of a name to the register of patent agents shall be communicated to the patent agent and also published on the official website.

Alteration of names, etc., in the register of patent agents (1) A patent agent may apply for the alteration of his name, address of the principal place of business and branch offices, if any, or the qualifications entered in the register of patent agents, e-mail address, telephone number, fax number or any other particulars under sub-section (1) of section 125. On receipt of such application and the fee specified therefor in the First Schedule for such request for alteration of particulars, the Controller shall cause the necessary alterations to be made in the register of patent agents.
(2) Every alteration made in the register of patent agents shall be published.

Refusal to recognise as patent agent If the Controller is of the opinion that any person should not be recognised as a patent agent in respect of any business under the Act as provided in sub-section (1) of section 131 thereof, he shall communicate his reasons to that person and direct him to show cause why he should not refuse to recognise him as such agent, within such time as he may allow, and after considering the reply, if any, of that person and giving him an opportunity of being heard, the Controller may pass such orders as he may deem fit.

Publication of the names of patent agents, registered under the Act The names and addresses of persons registered as patent agents shall from time to time be published.

CHAPTER XVI MISCELLANEOUS Period within which copies of specification etc. are to be filed The period within which copies of specification or corresponding documents to be filed by the applicant under sub-section (1) of section 138 shall be three months from the date of communication by the Controller.
Address of Communications All communications in relation to any proceeding under the Act or these rules shall be addressed to the Controller at the appropriate office.

Correction of clerical errors A request for the correction of a clerical error in any document referred to in section 78 shall be accompanied by a copy of the document highlighting the corrections clearly along with the fees payable therefor as specified in the First Schedule.

Manner of advertisement of the proposed correction of any error Where the Controller requires a notice of the nature of the proposed correction to be advertised, the request and the nature of the proposed correction shall be published and the person making the request shall also serve copies of the request and the copies of the document showing the proposed corrections to such persons who, in the opinion of the Controller, may be interested.

Manner and time of opposition to the making of corrections (1) Any person interested may, at any time, within three months from the date of the advertisement of the request for correction give notice of opposition to the Controller in Form 14 in duplicate.
(2) Such notice of opposition shall be accompanied by a statement in duplicate setting out the nature of the opponent's interest, the facts on which he relies and the relief which he seeks.
(3) A copy of the notice and of the statement shall be sent by the Controller to the person making the request.
(4) The procedure specified in rules 58 to 63 relating to the filing of reply statement, leaving evidence, hearing and costs shall, so far as may be, apply to the hearing of the opposition under section 78 as they apply in the hearing of the opposition proceeding.

Notification of corrections The Controller shall notify the person making a request for the correction and the opponent, if any, of the corrections made in the relevant document.

Form, etc., of affidavits (1) The affidavits required by the Act or these rules to be filed at the patent office or furnished to the Controller shall be duly sworn to in the manner as prescribed in sub-rule (3).
(2) Affidavits shall be confined to such facts as the deponent is able, of his own knowledge, to prove except in interlocutory matters, where statements of belief of the deponent may be admitted, provided that the grounds thereof are given.
(3) Affidavits shall be sworn to as follows:- (a) in India-before any court or person having by law authority to receive evidence, or before any officer empowered by such court as aforesaid to administer oaths or to take affidavits;
(b) in any country or place outside India-before a diplomatic or consular officer, within the meaning of the Diplomatic and Consular Officers (Oaths and Fees) Act, 1948 (41 of 1948) in such country or place or before a notary of the country or place, recognised by the Central Government under section 14 of the Notaries Act, 1952 (53 of 1952), or before a judge or magistrate of the country or place.
(4) Alterations and interlineations shall, before an affidavit is sworn to or affirmed be authenticated by the initials of the person before whom the affidavit is sworn to.

Exhibits Where there are exhibits to be filed in an opposition or any other proceedings, a copy or impression of each exhibit shall be supplied to the other party at his request and expense; if copies or impressions of the exhibits cannot conveniently be furnished, the originals shall be left with the Controller for inspection by the person interested by prior appointment. The exhibits in original if not already left with the Controller shall be produced at the hearing.

Directions not otherwise prescribed (1) Where for the proper prosecution or completion of any proceedings under the Act or these rules, the Controller is of the opinion that it is necessary for a party to such proceedings to perform an act, file a document or produce evidence, for which provision has not been made in the Act or these rules, he may, by notice in writing, require such party to perform the act, file the document or produce the evidence specified in such notice.
(2) Where an applicant or a party to a proceeding desires to be heard or not heard, the Controller may, at any time, require him to submit his statement in writing giving such information as the Controller may deem necessary within the time specified by him.

Exercise of discretionary power by the Controller Before exercising any discretionary power under the Act or these rules which is likely to affect an applicant for a patent or a party to a proceeding adversely, the Controller shall give such applicant or party, a hearing, after giving him or them, ten days notice of such hearing ordinarily.

Adjournment of hearing An applicant for patent or a party to a proceeding may make a request for adjournment of the hearing with reasonable cause along with the prescribed fee prescribed in First Schedule, at least three days before the date of hearing and the Controller, if he thinks fit to do so, and upon such terms as he may direct, may adjourn the hearing and intimate the parties accordingly: Provided that no party shall be given more than two adjournments and each adjournment shall not be for more than thirty days.

Application for review of decisions or setting aside of orders of the Controller (1) An application to the Controller for the review of his decision under clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 77 shall be made in Form 24 within one month from the date of communication of such decision to the applicant or within such further period not exceeding one month thereafter as the Controller may on a request made in Form 4 allow and shall be accompanied by a statement setting forth the grounds on which the review is sought. Where the decision in question concerns any other person in addition to the applicant, the Controller shall forthwith transmit a copy of each of the application and the statement to the other person concerned.
(2) An application to the Controller for setting aside an order passed by him ex parte under clause (g) of sub-section (1) of section 77 shall be made in Form 24 within one month from the date of communication of such order to the applicant or within such further period not exceeding one month as the Controller may on a request made in Form 4 allow and shall be accompanied by a statement setting forth the grounds on which the application is based. Where the order concerns any other person in addition to the applicant, the Controller shall, forthwith transmit a copy each of the application and the statement to the other person concerned.

Form and manner in which statements required under section 146(2) to be furnished Form and manner in which statements required under section 146(2) to be furnished (1) ) The statements shall be furnished by every patentee and every licensee under sub-section (2) of section 146 in Form 27 which shall be duly verified by the patentee or the licencee or his authorised agent.
(2) The statements referred to in sub-rule (1) shall be furnished once in respect of every financial year, starting from the financial year commencing immediately after the financial year in which the patent was granted, and shall be furnished within six months from the expiry of each such financial year.
(3) The Controller may publish the information received by him under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 146.

Form of application for the issue of a duplicate patent An application for the issue of a duplicate patent under section 154 shall contain a statement setting out the circumstances in which the patent was lost or destroyed or cannot be produced together with the fee as specified therefor in the First Schedule.

Supply of certified copies and certificates under sections 72 and 147 (1) Certified copies of any entry in the register, or certificates of, or extracts from patents, specifications and other public documents in the patent office, or from registers and other records including records in computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form kept there, may be furnished by the Controller on a request therefor made to him and on payment of the fee specified therefor in the First Schedule:
Provided that certified copies shall be issued in the order in which the request is filed.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), certified copies shall be furnished within a period of one week if such request is made along with the fee specified therefore in the First Schedule.

Request for information under section 153 (1) A request for information in respect of the following matters relating to any patent or application for patent shall be admissible, namely:- (a) as to when a complete specification following a provisional specification has been filed or an application for patent has been deemed to have been abandoned;
(aa) as to when the information under section 8 has been filed.
(b) as to when publication of application has been made under section 11A;
(c) as to when an application has been withdrawn under section 11B;
(d) as to when a request for examination has been made under section 11B;
(e) as to when the examination report has been issued under section 12;
(f) as to when an application for patent has been refused;
(g) as to when a patent has been granted;
(h) as to when a renewal fee has been paid;
(i) as to when the term of a patent has expired or shall expire;
(j) as to when an entry has been made in the register or application has been made for the making of such entry; or (k) as to when any application is made or action taken involving an entry in the register, publication in the Official Journal or otherwise, if the nature of the application or action is specified in the request.
(2) Separate request shall be made in respect of each item of information required.
(3) The fee payable on a request to be made under section 153 shall be as set out in the First Schedule.

Agency (1) The authorisation of an agent for the purposes of the Act and these rules shall be filed in Form 26 or in the form of a power of attorney within a period of three months from the date of filing of such application or document, failing which no action shall be taken on such application or documents for further processing till such deficiency is removed.
(2) Where any authorisation has been made under sub-rule (1), service upon the agent of any document relating to any proceeding or matter under the Act or these rules shall be deemed to be service upon the person so authorising him and all communications directed to be made to a person in respect of any proceeding or matter may be addressed to such agent, and all appearances before the Controller relating thereto may be made by or through such agent.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1) and (2), the Controller may, if it is considered necessary, require the personal signature or presence of an applicant, opponent or party to such proceeding or matter.

Scale of costs (1) In all proceedings before the Controller, he may, subject to rule 63, award costs as he considers reasonable, having regard to all the circumstances of the case:
Provided that the amount of costs awarded in respect of any matter set forth in the Fourth Schedule shall not exceed the amount specified therein.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), the Controller may, in his discretion award a compensatory cost in any proceeding before him which in his opinion is false or vexatious.

Powers of Controller generally Any document for the amendment of which no special provision is made in the Act may be amended and any irregularity in procedure which in the opinion of the Controller may be obviated without detriment to the interests of any person, may be corrected if the Controller thinks fit and upon such terms as he may direct.

Power to extend time prescribed (1) Except for the time prescribed in clause (i) of sub-rule (4) of rule 20, sub-rule (6) of rule 20, rule 21, sub-rules (1), (5) and (6) of rule 24B, sub-rules (10) and (11) of rule 24C, sub-rule (4) of rule 55, sub-rule (1A) of rule 80 and sub-rules (1) and (2) of rule 130, the time prescribed by these rules for doing of any act or the taking of any proceeding thereunder may be extended by the Controller for a period of one month, if he thinks it fit to do so and upon such terms as he may direct.
(2) Any request for extension of time prescribed by these rules for the doing of any act or the taking of any proceeding thereunder shall be made before the expiry of such time prescribed in these rules.

Hearing before the Controller to be in public in certain cases Where the hearing before the Controller of any dispute between two or more parties relating to an application for a patent or to any matter in connection with a patent takes place after the date of the publication of the complete specification, the hearing of the dispute shall be in public unless the Controller, after consultation with the parties to the dispute who appear in person or are represented at the hearing, otherwise directs.

Details of the Forms required to be filed under The Patents Rules 2003

Number of Entry On what payable Number of the relevant Form For e‐filing For physical filing Natural person(s) or Startup(s) or Small entit(y)/(ies) or educational institution(s) Other(s), alone or with natural person(s) or Startup(s) or Small entit(y)/(ies) or educational institution(s) Natural person(s) or Startup(s) or Small entit(y)/(ies) or educational institution(s) Other(s), alone or with natural person(s) or Startup(s) or Small entit(y)/(ies) or educational institution(s) Rupees Rupees Rupees Rupees
1.
On application for a patent under sections 7, 54 or 135 and rule 20(1) accompanied by provisional or complete specification— (i)for each sheet of specification in addition to 30, excluding sequence listing of nucleotides and/ or amino acid sequences under sub‐rule (3) of rule (9);
(ii) for each claim in addition to 10;
(iii) for each page of sequence listing of nucleotides and/ or amino acid sequences under sub‐rule (3) of rule (9).
1600 Multiple of 1600 in case of every multiple priority.
(i)160 (ii)320 (iii) 160 subject to a maximum of 24000 8000 Multiple of 8000 in case of every multiple priority.
(i)800 (ii)1600 (iii) 800 subject to a maximum of 120000 1750 Multiple of 1750 in case of every multiple priority.
(i)180 (ii)350 Not Allowed 8800 Multiple of 8800 in case of every multiple priority.
(i)880 (ii)1750 Not Allowed
2.
On filing complete specification after provisional up to 30 pages having up to 10 claims – (i)for each sheet of specification in addition to 30, excluding sequence listing of nucleotides and/ or amino acid sequences under sub‐rule (3) of rule (9);
(ii) for each claim in addition to 10.
No Fee (i)160 (ii)320 No Fee (i)800 (ii)1600 No Fee (i)180 (ii)350 No Fee (i)880 (ii)1750

(iii) for each page of sequence listing of nucleotides and/ or amino acid sequences under sub‐rule (3) of rule (9).
(iii) 160 subject to a maximum of 24000 (iii) 800 subject to a maximum of 120000 Not Allowed Not Allowed
3.
On filing a statement and undertaking under section 8.
No fee No fee No fee No fee
4.
i) On request for extension of time under sections 53(2) and 142(4), rules 13(6), 80(1A) and 130 (per month).
ii) On request for extension of time under sub‐rule (5) of rule 24B (per month).
iii) On request for extension of time under sub‐rule (11) of rule 24C (per month).
5.
On filing a declaration as to inventorship under sub‐rule (6) of rule 13.
No Fee No Fee No Fee No Fee
6.
On application for postdating ‐
7.
On application for deletion of reference under section 19(2).
8.
(i) On claim under section 20(1);
(ii) On request for direction under section 20(4) or 20(5).
9.
(i) On notice of opposition to grant of patent under section 25(2);
(ii) On filing representation opposing grant of patent under section 25(1).
7A No fee No fee No fee No fee
10.
On giving notice that hearing before Controller shall be attended under rule 62(2).
‐
11.
On application under sections 28(2), 28(3) or 28(7).
12.
Request for publication under section 11A(2) and rule 24A.

13.
Application for withdrawing the application under section 11B(4), and rules 7(4A) and 26.
No Fee No Fee No Fee No Fee
14.
On request for examination of application for patent— (i)under section 11B and rule 24(1);
(ii)under rule 20(4)(ii) 14A.
On request for expedited examination of application for patent under rule 24C.
18A Not allowed Not allowed 14B.
Conversion of the request for examination filed under rule 24B to request for expedited examination under rule 24C.
18A Not allowed Not allowed On application under section 44 for amendment of patent.
16.
On application for directions under section 51(1) or 51(2).
17.
On request for grant of a patent under sections 26(1) and 52(2).
18.
On request for converting a patent of addition to an independent patent under section 55 (1).
‐
19.
For renewal of a patent under section 53— (i) before the expiration of the 2nd year from the date of patent in respect of 3rd year;
‐ (ii) before the expiration of the 3rd year in respect of the 4th year;
‐ (iv) before the expiration of the 4th year in respect of the 5th year;
‐ (v) before the expiration of the 5th year in respect of the 6th year;
‐ (vi) before the expiration of the 6th year in respect of the 7th year;
‐ (vii) before the expiration of the 7th year in respect of the 8th year;
‐ before the expiration of ‐

the 8th year in respect of the 9th year;
(viii) before the expiration of the 9th year in respect of the 10th year;
‐ (ix) before the expiration of the 10th year in respect of the 11th year;
‐ (x) before the expiration of the 11th year in respect of the 12th year;
‐ (xi) before the expiration of the 12th year in respect of the 13th year;
‐ (xii) before the expiration of the 13th year in respect of the 14th year;
‐ (xiii) before the expiration of the 14th year in respect of the 15th year;
‐ (xiv) before the expiration of the 15th year in respect of the 16th year;
‐ (xv) before the expiration of the 16th year in respect of the 17th year;
‐ (xvi) before the expiration of the 17th year in respect of the 18th year;
‐ (xvii) before the expiration of the 18th year in respect of the 19th year ‐ (xviii) before the expiration of the 19th year in respect of the 20th year.
‐
20.
On application for amendment of application for patent or complete specification or other related documents under section 57— (i) before grant of patent;
(ii) after grant of patent;
(iii) where amendment is for changing name or address or nationality or address for service
21.
On notice of opposition to an application under sections 57(4), 61(1) and 87(2) or to surrender a patent under section 63(3) or to a request under section 78(5).
22.
On application for

restoration of a patent under section 60.
23.
Additional fee for restoration under section 61(3) and rule 86(1).
‐
24.
On notice of offer to surrender a patent under section 63.
—
25.
On application for the entry in the register of patents of the name of a person entitled to a patent or as a share or as a mortgage or as licensee or as otherwise or for the entry in the register of patents of notification of a document under sections 69(1) or 69(2) and rules 90(1) or 90(2).
(In respect of each patent) 8,000 (In respect of each patent) (In respect of each patent) 8,800 (In respect of each patent)
26.
On application for alteration of an entry in the register of patents or register of patent agents under rules 94(1) or rule 118(1).
—
27.
On request for entry of an additional address for service in the Register of Patents under rule 94(3).
—
28.
On application for compulsory license under sections 84(1), 91(1), 92(1) and 92A.
2400 12000 2650 13200
29.
On application for revocation of a patent under section 85(1).
30.
On application for revision of terms and conditions of licence under section 88(4).
31.
On request for termination of compulsory licence under section 94.
32.
On application for registration as a patent agent under rule 109(1) or rule 112.
Not applicable Not applicable
33.
On request for appearing in the qualifying examination under rule 109(3).
— Not applicable Not applicable

34.
For continuance of the name of a person in the register of patent agents— (i)for the 1st year to be paid along with registration;
(ii) for every year excluding the 1st year to be paid on the 1st April in each year ‐ ‐ Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable
35.
On application for duplicate certificate of patent agent under rule 111A.
‐‐ Not applicable Not applicable
36.
On application for restoration of the name of a person in the register of patent agents under rule 117(1).
1600 (Plus continuation fee under entry number 34) Not applicable 1750 (Plus continuation fee under entry number 34) Not applicable
37.
On a request for correction of clerical error under section 78(2).
—
38.
On application for review or setting aside the decision or order of the controller under section 77(1)(f) or 77(1)(g).
39.
On application for permission for applying patent outside India under section 39 and rule 71(1).
40.
On application for duplicate patent under section 154 and rule
132.
—
41.
(i) On request for certified copies under section 72 or for certificate under section 147 and rule 133(1).
— (up to 30 pages and, thereafter, 30 for each extra page) (up to 30 pages and, thereafter, 150 for each extra page) (up to 30 pages and, thereafter, 30 for each extra page) (up to 30 pages and, thereafter, 150 for each extra page) (ii) On request for certified copies under section 72 or for certificate under section 147 and rule 133(2).
‐‐ (up to 30 pages and thereafter, 30 for each extra page) (up to 30 pages and thereafter, 30 for each extra page) (up to 30 pages and thereafter, 30 for each extra page) (up to 30 pages and thereafter, 30 for each extra page)
42.
For certifying office copies, printed each.
—
43.
On request for inspection of register under section 72, inspection under rule —

27 or rule 74A.
44.
On request for information under section 153 and rule
134.
—
45.
On form of authorisation of a patent agent.
No Fee No Fee No Fee No Fee
46.
On petition not otherwise provided for.
—
47.
For supplying of photocopies of the documents, per page.
—
48.
Transmittal fee for International application.
— 48A Transmittal fee for International application (for ePCT filing).
— No Fee No Fee Not applicable Not applicable
49.
For preparation of certified copy of priority document and for transmission of the same to the International Bureau of World Intellectual Property Organization.
— (up to 30 pages and, thereafter, 30 for each extra page) (up to 30 pages and, thereafter, 150 for each extra page) (up to 30 pages and, thereafter, 30 for each extra page) (up to 30 pages and, thereafter, 150 for each extra page) 49A.
For preparation of certified copy of priority document and e‐ transmission through WIPO DAS.
‐‐ No fee No fee Not applicable Not applicable
50.
On statement regarding working of a patented invention on a commercial scale in India under section 146(2) and rule 131(1).
No fee No fee No fee No fee
51.
To be submitted for claiming the status of a small entity or startup No fee No fee No fee No fee
52.
Request for adjournment of hearing under rule 129A (for each adjournment).
‐ Miscellaneous form under rule 8(2), to be used when no other form is prescribed.
As applicable

LIST OF FORMS (The Patents Rules 2003)

Form No.
Section and rule Title
1.
Sections 7, 54 and 135 and rule 20(i).
Application for grant of a patent.
2.
Section 10; rule 13.
Provisional/ Complete Specification.
3.
Section 8 and rule 12.
Statement and undertaking.
4.
Sections 53(2) and 142(4), rules 13(6), 24B(4) (ii), 80(1A) and 130.
Request for extension for time.
5.
Section 10(6) and rule 13(6).
Declaration as to inventorship.
6.
Sections 20(1), 20(4), 20(5) and rules 34(1), 35(1) or 36(1).
Claim or request regarding any change in applicant for patent.
7.
Section 25(3) and rule 55A.
Notice of opposition on grant of a patent.
7 A.
Section 25(1) and rule 55(1) For filing a representation opposing grant of a patent under sub-section (1) of section 25.]
8.
Sections 28(2), 28(3) or 28(7) and rules 66, 67, 68.
Request or claimregarding mention of inventor as such in a patent.
9.
Section 11A(2) and rule 24A.
Request for publication.
10. Section 44 and rule 75.
' Application for amendment of patent.
11.
Sections 51(1), 51(2) and rules 76, 77.
Application for direction of the Controller.
12. Sections 26(1) & 52(2) and rules 63A and 79.
Request for grant of patent.
13. Section 57 and rule 81(1).
Application for amendment of the application for patent/ complete specification.
14. Sections 57(4), 61(1), 63(3), 78(5) and 87(2) and rule s 81(3)(b), 85(1), 87(2), 98(1), 101(3) or 124 Notice of opposition to amendment/ restoration/ surrender of patent/ grant of compulsory licence or revision of terms thereof or to a correction of clerical errors.

15.
Section 60 and rule 84.
Application for restoration of patents.
16.
Sections 69(1) or 69(2) and rules 90(l) and 90(2).
Application for registration of a itle/interest in a patent or share in it or egistration of any document purporting o affect proprietorship of the patent.
17.
Sections 84(1), 91, 92 or 92(A) and rule 96.
Application for compulsory licence.
18.
Section 11B and rules 20(4)(ii) and 24B(l)(i).
Request for examination of application for patent.
19.
Section 85(1) and rule 96.
Application for revocation of a patent for nonworking.
20.
Section 88(4) and rule 100.
Application for revision of terms and conditions of licence.
21.
Section 94, rule 102(1).
Request for termination of compulsory licence.
Rules 109(1) and 112.
Application for registration of Patent Agent.
Section 130(2) and 'rule 117(1).
Application for the restoration of the name in the register of Patent Agents.
Sections 77(1)(f), 77(1)(g) and rules 130(1) and 130(2).
Application for review / setting as1cte controller's decision/ order.
Section 39 and rule 71(1).
Request for permission for making patent application outside India.
Sections 127, 132 and rule 135.
Form of authorisation of a Patent Agent/ or any person in a matter or proceeding under the Act.
Section 146(2) and rule 131(1).
Statement regarding the working of the Patented invention on commercial scale in India.
Rules 2(fa) and 7 To be submitted by a small entity with every document for which a fee has been specified.
Section 118(4) and rules 7(4A), 24C(5) and 26 Request for withdrawal of patent application Rule 8(2) Miscellaneous form, to be used when no other form is prescribed

"FORM 18A THE PATENTS ACT,1970 and THE PATENT RULES,2003 REQUEST FOR
EXPEDITED EXAMINATION OF APPLICATION FOR PATENT [See section 11B and Rule 24C) (FOR OFFICE USE ONLY) RQ No.:
Filing Date:
Amount of fee Paid:
CBR no:
Signature:
1. APPLICANT(s) (A)NAME:
(B) NATIONALITY:
(C) ADDRESS:
2. I/\Ve hereby request that my/our application for patent no.filed 011for the

invention titled shall be examined under sections 12 and 13 of the Act.
or I/We hereby request that my/our application for patent no.filed onfor the

invention titled based on Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) application no .. ... .. ... ... .. ... ... ... dated . .. . . .. ... ... .. .. . ... made in country .. .. ... ... shall be examined under sections 12 and 13 of the Act, immediately without waiting for the expiry of 31 months as specified in rule 20( 4)(ii).
or I/We hereby request that my/our request for examination bearing no. for application for patent no.
filed onfor the invention titled may be converted to a request for expedited examination of patent application under rule 24C and the application shall be examined under sections 12 and 13 of the Act.
3. The applicant(s) to indicate (by ticking the appropriate box) any of the grounds applicable for request for expedited examination:
that India has been indicated as the competent International Searching Authority or elected as an International Preliminary Examining Authority in the corresponding international application; or that the applicant is a startup; or that the applicant is a small entity; or that the applicant is a natural person or in the case of joint applicants, all the applicants are natural persons, then applicant or at least one of the applicants is a female;
that the applicant is an institution established by a Central, Provincial or State Act, which is owned or controlled by the Government; or that the applicant is a Government company as defined in clause (45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013); or that the applicant is an institution wholly or substantially financed by the Government; or that the application pertains to a sector which has been notified by the Central Government, on the basis of a request from the head of department of the Central Government; or that the applicant is eligible under an arrangement for processing a patent application pursuant to an

agreement between Indian Patent Office and a foreign Patent Office.
4.
Documents to be mandatorily submitted as evidence of eligibility for availing expedited examination on the grounds:
a.
that India has been indicated as the competent International Searching Authority in the corresponding international application: ‐ Relevant ISA number issued by ISA, India. that India has been elected as an International Preliminary Examining Authority in the corresponding international application: ‐

Relevant IPEA number issued by IPEA, India.
b.
that the applicant is a startup:

A. For an Indian applicant: The certificate of recognition as a startup from Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade.
B. In case of a foreign entity: Any document as evidence of eligibility.
c.
that the applicant is a small entity:

A. For an Indian applicant: Evidence of registration under the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Act, 2006 (27 of 2006).
B. In case of a foreign entity: Any document as evidence of eligibility.
d.
that the applicant is a natural person or in the case of joint applicants, all the applicants are natural persons, then applicant or at least one of the applicants is a female:

A. In case of Indian applicant: Photo identity card of female applicant issued by competent authority as evidence of eligibility.
B. In case of a foreign applicant: Photo identity card of female applicant issued by competent authority as evidence of eligibility.
e.
Where the applicant is a department of the Government:

A. In case of Indian applicant: Any document as evidence of eligibility.
B. In case of a foreign applicant: Any document as evidence of eligibility.
f.
that the applicant is an institution established by a Central, Provincial or State Act, which is owned or controlled by the Government:

A. In case of Indian applicant: Any document as evidence of eligibility.

B. In case of a foreign applicant: Any document as evidence of eligibility.

g.
that the applicant is a Government company as defined in clause (45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013):

A. In case of Indian applicant: Any document as evidence of eligibility.
B. In case of a foreign applicant: Any document as evidence of eligibility.
h.
that the applicant is an institution wholly or substantially financed by the Government:

A. In case of Indian applicant: Any document as evidence of eligibility.
B. In case of a foreign applicant: Any document as evidence of eligibility.
i.
that the application pertains to a sector which has been notified by the Central Government, on the basis of a request from the head of a department of the Central Government:

Notification from the Central Government and documents as maybe required by the Controller.
j.
that the applicant is eligible under an arrangement for processing a patent application pursuant to an agreement between Indian Patent Office and a foreign Patent Office:

Declarations and documents as maybe required by the Controller.” ADDRESS FOR SERVICE IN INDIA:
...
...
...
Dated this day of 20 Signature Name of the signatory To The Controller of Patent The Patent Office, at ... ... .
NOTE To be signed by the applicant(s) or by his/ their authorized registered patent agent "Strike out the column(s) which is / are not applicable.";
For fee: See First Schedule.";

FORM 27 THE PATENTS ACT, 1970 (39 of 1970) AND No Fee STATEMENT REGARDING THE WORKING OF PATENTED INVENTION(S) ON A COMMERCIAL SCALE IN INDIA [See section 146(2) and rule 131(1)]
1. Insert name, address, nationality, patent number(s).
I/ We, the Patentee(s)/ Licensee ..., in respect of patent number(s) ..., furnish this statement, (Explanation: One form may be filed in respect of multiple patents, provided all of them are related patents, wherein the approximate revenue / value accrued from a particular patented invention cannot be derived separately from the approximate revenue/value accrued from related patents, and all such patents are granted to the same patentee(s)).
2. State the financial year to which the statement relates in respect of the financial year ...
3. Worked / not worked.
Please state whether each patent in respect of which this form is being filed is worked or not worked.
Patent Number(s) Worked [Tick () if applicable] Not worked [ Tick () if applicable]

4. If worked.

(a) Approximate revenue / value accrued in India to the patentee(s)/ licensee furnishing the statement from patent number(s) where the working is through:
(1) Manufacturing in India ... (in INR) (2) Importing into India ... (in INR) (b) Brief in respect of (a) above (maximum 500 words)
5. If not worked Reasons for not working the patented invention(s) and steps being taken for working of the invention(s).(maximum 500 words)

The facts and matters stated above are true to the best of my/ our knowledge, information and belief. Dated this ... day of ... 20...
6. To be signed by Patentee(s) / Licensee / Authorised Agent furnishing the statement.
Signature(s) ...
To The Controller of Patents, The Patent Office, at ...
Note: Every patentee and every licensee (exclusive or otherwise) is required to file this Form; where a patent is granted to two or more persons, all such patentees may file this Form jointly; however, each licensee shall file this Form individually. ”.

Form 28 FORM 28 THE PATENTS ACT, 1970 (39 of 1970) AND TO BE SUBMITTED BY A SMALL ENTITY /STARTUP/EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION [See rules 2 (fa), 2(fb), 2(ca) and 7]
1.
Insert name, address and nationality I/We... applicant/patentee in respect of the patent application no... or patent no...hereby declare that I/we am/are a small entity in accordance with rule 2(fa) or a startup in accordance with rule 2(fb) or an educational institution in accordance with rule 2(ca) and submit the following document(s) as proof:
2.
Documents to be submitted

i. For claiming the status of a small entity:

A. For an Indian applicant: Evidence of registration under the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006(27 of 2006).

B. In case of a foreign entity: Any other document.

ii. For claiming the status of a startup

A. For an Indian applicant: Any document as evidence of eligibility, as defined in rule 2(fb).

B. In case of a foreign entity: Any other document.

iii For claiming the status of an educational institution

A. For an Indian applicant: Any document as evidence of eligibility, as defined in rule 2(ca).

B. In case of a foreign educational institution: Any other document
3.
To be signed by the applicant(s) /patentee(s)/authorized registered patent agent.
The information provided herein is correct to the best of my/our knowledge and belief. Dated this ... day of... ..20 ...
4.
Name of the natural person who has signed Signature...


================================================================================
SOURCE: Trade Marks Act, 1999.pdf
================================================================================

THE TRADE MARKS ACT, 1999

ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions and interpretation.

CHAPTER II
THE REGISTER AND CONDITIONS FOR REGISTRATION
3. Appointment of Registrar and other officers.
4. Power of Registrar to withdraw or transfer cases, etc.
5. Trade Marks Registry and offices thereof.
6. The Register of Trade Marks.
7. Classification of goods and services.
8. Publication of alphabetical index.
9. Absolute grounds for refusal of registration.
10. Limitation as to colour.
11. Relative grounds for refusal of registration.
12. Registration in the case of honest concurrent use, etc.
13. Prohibition of registration of names of chemical elements or international non-proprietary names.
14. Use of names and representations of living persons or persons recently dead.
15. Registration of parts of trade marks and of trade marks as a series.
16. Registration of trade marks as associated trade marks.
17. Effect of registration of parts of a mark.

CHAPTER III
PROCEDURE FOR AND DURATION OF REGISTRATION
18. Application for registration.
19. Withdrawal of acceptance.
20. Advertisement of application.
21. Opposition to registration.
22. Correction and amendment.
23. Registration.
24. Jointly owned trade marks.
25. Duration, renewal, removal and restoration of registration.
26. Effect of removal from register for failure to pay fee for renewal.

CHAPTER IV
EFFECT OF REGISTRATION
27. No action for infringement of unregistered trade mark.
28. Rights conferred by registration.
29. Infringement of registered trade marks.
30. Limits on effect of registered trade mark.
31. Registration to be prima facie evidence of validity.
32. Protection of registration on ground of distinctiveness in certain cases.
33. Effect of acquiescence.

34. Saving for vested rights.
35. Saving for use of name, address or description of goods or services.
36. Saving for words used as name or description of an article or substance or service.

CHAPTER IVA
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO PROTECTION OF TRADE MARKS THROUGH INTERNATIONAL REGISTRATION UNDER THE MADRID PROTOCOL 36A. Application of Act in case of international registration under Madrid Protocol.
36B. Definitions.
36C. Trade Marks Registry to deal with international applications.
36D. International application originating from India.
36E. International registrations where India has been designated.
36F. Effects of international registration.
36G. Duration and renewal of international registration.

CHAPTER V
ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSMISSION
37. Power of registered proprietor to assign and give receipts.
38. Assignability and transmissibility of registered trade marks.
39. Assignability and transmissibility of unregistered trade marks.
40. Restriction on assignment or transmission where multiple exclusive rights would be created.
41. Restriction on assignment or transmission when exclusive rights would be created in different parts of India.
42. Conditions for assignment otherwise than in connection with the goodwill of a business.
43. Assignability and transmissibility of certification trade marks.
44. Assignability and transmissibility of associated trade marks.
45. Registration of assignments and transmissions.

CHAPTER VI
USE OF TRADE MARKS AND REGISTERED USERS
46. Proposed use of trade mark by company to be formed, etc.
47. Removal from register and imposition of limitations on ground of non-use.
48. Registered users.
49. Registration as registered user.
50. Power of Registrar for variation or cancellation of registration as registered user.
51. Power of Registrar to call for information relating to agreement in respect of registered users.
52. Right of registered user to take proceedings against infringement.
53. No right of permitted user to take proceeding against infringement.
54. Registered user not to have right of assignment or transmission.
55. Use of one of associated or substantially identical trade marks equivalent to use of another.
56. Use of trade mark for export trade and use when form of trade connection changes.

CHAPTER VII
RECTIFICATION AND CORRECTION OF THE REGISTER
57. Power to cancel or vary registration and to rectify the register.
58. Correction of register.
59. Alteration of registered trade marks.
60. Adaptation of entries in register to amended or substituted classification of goods or services.

CHAPTER VIII
COLLECTIVE MARKS
61. Special provisions for collective marks.
62. Collective mark not to be misleading as to character or significance.
63. Application to be accompanied by regulations governing use of collective marks.
64. Acceptance of application and regulations by Registrar.
65. Regulations to be open to inspection.
66. Amendment of regulations.
67. Infringement proceedings by registered proprietor of collective mark.
68. Additional grounds for removal of registration of collective mark.

CHAPTER IX
CERTIFICATION TRADE MARKS
69. Certain provisions of this Act not applicable to certification trade marks.
70. Registration of certification trade marks.
71. Applications for registration of certification trade marks.
72. Consideration of application for registration by Registrar.
73. Opposition to registration of certification trade marks.
74. Filing of regulations governing use of a certification trade mark.
75. Infringement of certification trade marks.
76. Acts not constituting infringement of certification trade marks.
77. Cancellation or varying of registration of certification trade marks.
78. Rights conferred by registration of certification trade marks.

CHAPTER X. —SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR TEXTILE GOODS. [Omitted]
79. [Omitted.]
80. [Omitted.]
81. [Omitted.]
82. [Omitted.]

CHAPTER XI
APPELLATE BOARD
83. Establishment of Appellate Board.
84. Composition of Appellate Board.
85. Qualifications for appointment as Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, or other Members.
86. Term of office of Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members.
87. Vice-Chairperson or senior-most Member to act as Chairperson or discharge his functions in certain circumstances.
88. Salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members.
89. Resignation and removal.
89A. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and member.
90. Staff of Appellate Board.
91. Appeals to Appellate Board.
92. Procedure and powers of Appellate Board.
93. Bar of jurisdiction of courts, etc.

94. Bar to appear before Appellate Board.
95. Conditions as to making of interim orders.
96. Power of Chairperson to transfer cases from one Bench to another.
97. Procedure for application for rectification, etc., before Appellate Board.
98. Appearance of Registrar in legal proceedings.
99. Costs of Registrar in proceedings before Appellate Board.
100. Transfer of pending proceedings to Appellate Board.

CHAPTER XII OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE
101. Meaning of applying trade marks and trade descriptions.
102. Falsifying and falsely applying trade marks.
103. Penalty for applying false trade marks, trade descriptions, etc.
104. Penalty for selling goods or providing services to which false trade mark or false trade description is applied.
105. Enhanced penalty on second or subsequent conviction.
106. Penalty for removing piece goods, etc., contrary to section 81.
107. Penalty for falsely representing a trade mark as registered.
108. Penalty for improperly describing a place of business as connected with the Trade Marks Office.
109. Penalty for falsification of entries in the register.
110. No offence in certain cases.
111. Forfeiture of goods.
112. Exemption of certain persons employed in ordinary course of business.
113. Procedure where invalidity of registration is pleaded by the accused.
114. Offences by companies.
115. Cognizance of certain offences and the powers of police officer for search and seizure.
116. Evidence of origin of goods imported by sea.
117. Costs of defence or prosecution.
118. Limitation of prosecution.
119. Information as to commission of offence.
120. Punishment of abetment in India of acts done out of India.
121. Instructions of Central Government as to permissible variation to be observed by criminal courts.
CHAPTER XIII
MISCELLANEOUS
122. Protection of action taken in good faith.
123. Certain persons to be public servants.
124. Stay of proceedings where the validity of registration of the trade mark is questioned, etc.
125. Application for rectification of register to be made to Appellate Board in certain cases.
126. Implied warranty on sale of marked goods.
127. Powers of Registrar.
128. Exercise of discretionary power by Registrar.
129. Evidence before Registrar.
130. Death of party to a proceeding.
131. Extension of time.
132. Abandonment.
133. Preliminary advice by the Registrar as to distinctiveness.
134. Suit for infringement, etc., to be instituted before District Court.
135. Relief in suits for infringement or for passing off.
136. Registered user to be impleaded in certain proceedings.

137. Evidence of entries in register, etc., and things done by the Registrar.
138. Registrar and other officers not compellable to produce register, etc.
139. Power to require goods to show indication of origin.
140. Power to require information of imported goods bearing false trade marks.
141. Certificate of validity.
142. Groundless threats of legal proceedings.
143. Address for service.
144. Trade usages, etc., to be taken into consideration.
145. Agents.
146. Marks registered by an agent or representative without authority.
147. Indexes.
148. Documents open to public inspection.
149. Reports of Registrar to be placed before Parliament.
150. Fees and surcharge.
151. Savings in respect of certain matters in Chapter XII.
152. Declaration as to ownership of trade mark not registrable under the Registration Act, 1908.
153. Government to be bound.
154. Special provisions relating to applications for registration from citizens of convention countries.
155. Provision as to reciprocity.
156. Power of Central Government to remove difficulties.
157. Power to make rules.
158. Amendments.
159. Repeal and savings.
THE SCHEDULE.

THE TRADE MARKS ACT, 1999 ACT NO. 47 OF 1999 [30th December, 1999.] An Act to amend and consolidate the law relating to trade marks, to provide for registration and better protection of trade marks for goods and services and for the prevention of the use of fraudulent marks.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Trade Marks Act, 1999.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2. Definitions and interpretation.—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— (a) ―Appellate Board‖ means the Appellate Board established under section 83;
(b) ―assignment‖ means an assignment in writing by act of the parties concerned;
(c) ―associated trade marks‖ means trade marks deemed to be, or required to be, registered as associated trade marks under this Act;
(d) ―Bench‖ means a Bench of the Appellate Board;
(e) ―certification trade mark‖ means a mark capable of distinguishing the goods or services in connection with which it is used in the course of trade which are certified by the proprietor of the mark in respect of origin, material, mode of manufacture of goods or performance of services, quality, accuracy or other characteristics from goods or services not so certified and registrable as such under Chapter IX in respect of those goods or services in the name, as proprietor of the certification trade mark, of that person;
(f) ―2[Chairperson]‖ means the 2[Chairperson] of the Appellate Board;
(g) ―collective mark‖ means a trade mark distinguishing the goods or services of members of an association of persons (not being a partnership within the meaning of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 1932) which is the proprietor of the mark from those of others;
(h) ―deceptively similar‖.—A mark shall be deemed to be deceptively similar to another mark if it so nearly resembles that other mark as to be likely to deceive or cause confusion;
(i) ―false trade description‖ means— (I) a trade description which is untrue or misleading in a material respect as regards the goods or services to which it is applied; or (II) any alteration of a trade description as regards the goods or services to which it is applied, whether by way of addition, effacement or otherwise, where that alteration makes the description untrue or misleading in a material respect; or

1. 15th September, 2003, vide notification No. S.O. 1048(E), dated 15th September, 2003, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii).

(III) any trade description which denotes or implies that there are contained, as regards the goods to which it is applied, more yards or metres than there are contained therein standard yards or standard metres; or (IV) any marks or arrangement or combination thereof when applied— (a) to goods in such a manner as to be likely to lead persons to believe that the goods are the manufacture or merchandise of some person other than the person whose merchandise or manufacture they really are;
(b) in relation to services in such a manner as to be likely to lead persons to believe that the services are provided or rendered by some person other than the person whose services they really are; or (V) any false name or initials of a person applied to goods or services in such manner as if such name or initials were a trade description in any case where the name or initials— (a) is or are not a trade mark or part of a trade mark; and (b) is or are identical with or deceptively similar to the name or initials of a person carrying on business in connection with goods or services of the same description or both and who has not authorised the use of such name or initials; and (c) is or are either the name or initials of a fictitious person or some person not bona fide carrying on business in connection with such goods or services, and the fact that a trade description is a trade mark or part of a trade mark shall not prevent such trade description being a false trade description within the meaning of this Act;
(j) ―goods‖ means anything which is the subject of trade or manufacture;
(k) ―Judicial Member‖ means a Member of the Appellate Board appointed as such under this Act, and includes the 1[Chairperson] and the 2[Vice-Chairperson];
(l) ―limitations‖ (with its grammatical variations) means any limitation of the exclusive right to the use of a trade mark given by the registration of a person as proprietor thereof, including limitations of that right as to mode or area of use within India or outside India;
(m) ―mark‖ includes a device, brand, heading, label, ticket, name, signature, word, letter, numeral, shape of goods, packaging or combination of colours or any combination thereof;
(n) ―Member‖ means a Judicial Member or a Technical Member of the Appellate Board and includes the 1[Chairperson] and the 2[Vice-Chairperson];
(o) ―name‖ includes any abbreviation of a name;
(p) ―notify‖ means to notify in the Trade Mark Journal published by the Registrar;
(q) ―package‖ includes any case, box, container, covering, folder, receptacle, vessel, casket, bottle, wrapper, label, band, ticket, reel, frame, capsule, cap, lid, stopper and cork;
(r) ―permitted use‖, in relation to a registered trade mark, means the use of trade mark— (i) by a registered user of the trade mark in relation to goods or services— (a) with which he is connected in the course of trade; and (b) in respect of which the trade mark remains registered for the time being; and (c) for which he is registered as registered user; and (d) which complies with any conditions or limitations to which the registration of registered user is subject; or

(ii) by a person other than the registered proprietor and registered user in relation to goods or services— (a) with which he is connected in the course of trade; and (b) in respect of which the trade mark remains registered for the time being; and (c) by consent of such registered proprietor in a written agreement; and (d) which complies with any conditions or limitations to which such user is subject and to which the registration of the trade mark is subject;
(s) ―prescribed‖ means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(t) ―register‖ means the Register of Trade Marks referred to in sub-section (1) of section 6;
(u) ―registered‖ (with its grammatical variations) means registered under this Act;
(v) ―registered proprietor‖, in relation to a trade mark, means the person for the time being entered in the register as proprietor of the trade mark;
(w) ―registered trade mark‖ means a trade mark which is actually on the register and remaining in force;
(x) ―registered user‖ means a person who is for the time being registered as such under section 49;
(y) ―Registrar‖ means the Registrar of Trade Marks referred to in section 3;
(z) ―Service‖ means service of any description which is made available to potential users and includes the provision of services in connection with business of any industrial or commercial matters such as banking, communication, education, financing, insurance, chit funds, real estate, transport, storage, material treatment, processing, supply of electrical or other energy, boarding, lodging, entertainment, amusement, construction, repair, conveying of news or information and advertising;
(za) ―trade description‖ means any description, statement or other indication, direct or indirect,— (i) as to the number, quantity, measure, gauge or weight of any goods; or (ii) as to the standard of quality of any goods or services according to a classification commonly used or recognised in the trade; or (iii) as to fitness for the purpose, strength, performance or behaviour of any goods, being ―drug‖ as defined in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940), or ―food‖ as defined in the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954); or (iv) as to the place or country in which or the time at which any goods or services were made, produced or provided, as the case may be; or (v) as to the name and address or other indication of the identity of the manufacturer or of the person providing the services or of the person for whom the goods are manufactured or services are provided; or (vi) as to the mode of manufacture or producing any goods or providing services; or (vii) as to the material of which any goods are composed; or (viii) as to any goods being the subject of an existing patent, privilege or copyright, and includes— (a) any description as to the use of any mark which according to the custom of the trade is commonly taken to be an indication of any of the above matters;
(b) the description as to any imported goods contained in any bill of entry or shipping bill;
(c) any other description which is likely to be misunderstood or mistaken for all or any of the said matters;

(zb) ―trade mark‖ means a mark capable of being represented graphically and which is capable of distinguishing the goods or services of one person from those of others and may include shape of goods, their packaging and combination of colours; and— (i) in relation to Chapter XII (other than section 107), a registered trade mark or a mark used in relation to goods or services for the purpose of indicating or so as to indicate a connection in the course of trade between the goods or services, as the case may be, and some person having the right as proprietor to use the mark; and (ii) in relation to other provisions of this Act, a mark used or proposed to be used in relation to goods or services for the purpose of indicating or so as to indicate a connection in the course of trade between the goods or services, as the case may be, and some person having the right, either as proprietor or by way of permitted user, to use the mark whether with or without any indication of the identity of that person, and includes a certification trade mark or collective mark;
(zc) ―transmission‖ means transmission by operation of law, devolution on the personal representative of a deceased person and any other mode of transfer, not being assignment;
(zd) ―Technical Member‖ means a Member who is not a Judicial Member;
(ze) ―tribunal‖ means the Registrar or, as the case may be, the Appellate Board, before which the proceeding concerned is pending;
(zf) ―1[Vice-Chairperson ]‖ means a 2[Vice-Chairperson] of the Appellate Board;
(zg) ―well known trade mark‖, in relation to any goods or services, means a mark which has become so to the substantial segment of the public which uses such goods or receives such services that the use of such mark in relation to other goods or services would be likely to be taken as indicating a connection in the course of trade or rendering of services between those goods or services and a person using the mark in relation to the first-mentioned goods or services.
(2) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, any reference— (a) to ―trade mark‖ shall include reference to ―collective mark‖ or ―certification trade mark‖;
(b) to the use of a mark shall be construed as a reference to the use of printed or other visual representation of the mark;
(c) to the use of a mark,— (i) in relation to goods, shall be construed as a reference to the use of the mark upon, or in any physical or in any other relation whatsoever, to such goods;
(ii) in relation to services, shall be construed as a reference to the use of the mark as or as part of any statement about the availability, provision or performance of such services;
(d) to the Registrar shall be construed as including a reference to any officer when discharging the functions of the Registrar in pursuance of sub-section (2) of section 3;
(e) to the Trade Marks Registry shall be construed as including a reference to any office of the Trade Marks Registry.
(3) For the purposes of this Act, goods and services are associated with each other if it is likely that those goods might be sold or otherwise traded in and those services might be provided by the same business and so with descriptions of goods and descriptions of services.
(4) For the purposes of this Act, ―existing registered trade mark‖ means a trade mark registered under the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958) immediately before the commencement of this Act.

CHAPTER II
THE REGISTER AND CONDITIONS FOR REGISTRATION
3. Appointment of Registrar and other officers.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a person to be known as the Controller-General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks, who shall be the Registrar of Trade Marks for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other officers with such designations as it thinks fit for the purpose of discharging, under the superintendence and direction of the Registrar, such functions of the Registrar under this Act as he may from time to time authorise them to discharge.
4. Power of Registrar to withdraw or transfer cases, etc.—Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 3, the Registrar may, by order in writing and for reasons to be recorded therein, withdraw any matter pending before an officer appointed under the said sub-section (2) and deal with such matter himself either de novo or from the stage it was so withdrawn or transfer the same to another officer so appointed who may, subject to special directions in the order of transfer, proceed with the matter either de novo or from the stage it was so transferred.
5. Trade Marks Registry and offices thereof.—(1) For the purposes of this Act, there shall be a trade marks registry and the Trade Marks Registry established under the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958) shall be the Trade Marks Registry under this Act.
(2) The head office of the Trade Marks Registry shall be at such place as the Central Government may specify, and for the purpose of facilitating the registration of trade marks, there may be established at such places as the Central Government may think fit branch offices of the Trade Marks Registry.
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, define the territorial limits within which an office of the Trade Marks Registry may exercise its functions.
(4) There shall be a seal of the Trade Marks Registry.
6. The Register of Trade Marks.—(1) For the purposes of this Act, a record called the Register of Trade Marks shall be kept at the head office of the Trade Marks Registry, wherein shall be entered all registered trade marks with the names, addresses and description of the proprietors, notifications of assignment and transmissions, the names, addresses and descriptions of registered users, conditions, limitations and such other matter relating to registered trade marks as may be prescribed.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), it shall be lawful for the Registrar to keep the records wholly or partly in computer floppies diskettes or in any other electronic form subject to such safeguards as may be prescribed.
(3) Where such register is maintained wholly or partly on computer under sub-section (2) any reference in this Act to entry in the Register shall be construed as the reference to any entry as maintained on computer or in any other electronic form.
(4) No notice of any trust, express or implied or constructive, shall be entered in the register and no such notice shall be receivable by the Registrar.
(5) The register shall be kept under the control and management of the Registrar.
(6) There shall be kept at each branch office of the Trade Marks Registry a copy of the register and such of the other documents mentioned in section 148 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct.
(7) The Register of Trade Marks, both Part A and Part B, existing at the commencement of this Act, shall be incorporated in and form part of the register under this Act.
7. Classification of goods and services.—(1) The Registrar shall classify goods and services, as far as may be, in accordance with the International classification of goods and services for the purposes of registration of trade marks.
(2) Any question arising as to the class within which any goods or services falls shall be determined by the Registrar whose decision shall be final.

8. Publication of alphabetical index.—(1) The Registrar may publish in the prescribed manner an alphabetical index of classification of goods and services referred to in section 7.
(2) Where any goods or services are not specified in the alphabetical index of goods and services published under sub-section (1), the classification of goods or services shall be determined by the Registrar in accordance with sub-section (2) of section 7.

9. Absolute grounds for refusal of registration.—(1) The trade marks— (a) which are devoid of any distinctive character, that is to say, not capable of distinguishing the goods or services of one person from those of another person;
(b) which consist exclusively of marks or indications which may serve in trade to designate the kind, quality, quantity, intended purpose, values, geographical origin or the time of production of the goods or rendering of the service or other characteristics of the goods or service;
(c) which consist exclusively of marks or indications which have become customary in the current language or in the bona fide and established practices of the trade, shall not be registered:
Provided that a trade mark shall not be refused registration if before the date of application for registration it has acquired a distinctive character as a result of the use made of it or is a well-known trade mark.
(2) A mark shall not be registered as a trade mark if— (a) it is of such nature as to deceive the public or cause confusion;
(b) it contains or comprises of any matter likely to hurt the religious susceptibilities of any class or section of the citizens of India;
(c) it comprises or contains scandalous or obscene matter;
(d) its use is prohibited under the Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950 (12 of 1950).
(3) A mark shall not be registered as a trade mark if it consists exclusively of— (a) the shape of goods which results from the nature of the goods themselves; or (b) the shape of goods which is necessary to obtain a technical result; or (c) the shape which gives substantial value to the goods.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the nature of goods or services in relation to which the trade mark is used or proposed to be used shall not be a ground for refusal of registration.
10. Limitation as to colour.—(1) A trade mark may be limited wholly or in part to any combination of colours and any such limitation shall be taken into consideration by the tribunal having to decide on the distinctive character of the trade mark.
(2) So far as a trade mark is registered without limitation of colour, it shall be deemed to be registered for all colours.
11. Relative grounds for refusal of registration.—(1) Save as provided in section 12, a trade mark shall not be registered if, because of— (a) its identity with an earlier trade mark and similarity of goods or services covered by the trade mark; or (b) its similarity to an earlier trade mark and the identity or similarity of the goods or services covered by the trade mark, there exists a likelihood of confusion on the part of the public, which includes the likelihood of association with the earlier trade mark.

(2) A trade mark which— (a) is identical with or similar to an earlier trade mark; and (b) is to be registered for goods or services which are not similar to those for which the earlier trade mark is registered in the name of a different proprietor, shall not be registered if or to the extent the earlier trade mark is a well-known trade mark in India and the use of the later mark without due cause would take unfair advantage of or be detrimental to the distinctive character or repute of the earlier trade mark.
(3) A trade mark shall not be registered if, or to the extent that, its use in India is liable to be prevented— (a) by virtue of any law in particular the law of passing off protecting an unregistered trade mark used in the course of trade; or (b) by virtue of law of copyright.
(4) Nothing in this section shall prevent the registration of a trade mark where the proprietor of the earlier trade mark or other earlier right consents to the registration, and in such case the Registrar may register the mark under special circumstances under section 12.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, earlier trade mark means— 1[(a) a registered trade mark or an application under section 18 bearing an earlier date of filing or an international registration referred to in section 36E or convention application referred to in section 154 which has a date of application earlier than that of the trade mark in question, taking account, where appropriate, of the priorities claimed in respect of the trade marks;] (b) a trade mark which, on the date of the application for registration of the trade mark in question, or where appropriate, of the priority claimed in respect of the application, was entitled to protection as a well-known trade mark.
(5) A trade mark shall not be refused registration on the grounds specified in sub-sections (2) and (3), unless objection on any one or more of those grounds is raised in opposition proceedings by the proprietor of the earlier trade mark.
(6) The Registrar shall, while determining whether a trade mark is a well-known trade mark, take into account any fact which he considers relevant for determining a trade mark as a well-known trade mark including— (i) the knowledge or recognition of that trade mark in the relevant section of the public including knowledge in India obtained as a result of promotion of the trade mark;
(ii) the duration, extent and geographical area of any use of that trade mark;
(iii) the duration, extent and geographical area of any promotion of the trade mark, including advertising or publicity and presentation, at fairs or exhibition of the goods or services to which the trade mark applies;
(iv) the duration and geographical area of any registration of or any application for registration of that trade mark under this Act to the extent that they reflect the use or recognition of the trade mark;
(v) the record of successful enforcement of the rights in that trade mark, in particular the extent to which the trade mark has been recognised as a well-known trade mark by any court or Registrar under that record.
(7) The Registrar shall, while determining as to whether a trade mark is known or recognised in a relevant section of the public for the purposes of sub-section (6), take into account— (i) the number of actual or potential consumers of the goods or services;
(ii) the number of persons involved in the channels of distribution of the goods or services;

1. Subs. by Act 40 of 2010, s. 2, for clause (a) (w.e.f. 8-7-2013).

(iii) the business circles dealing with the goods or services, to which that trade mark applies.
(8) Where a trade mark has been determined to be well known in at least one relevant section of the public in India by any court or Registrar, the Registrar shall consider that trade mark as a well-known trade mark for registration under this Act.
(9) The Registrar shall not require as a condition, for determining whether a trade mark is a well-known trade mark, any of the following, namely:— (i) that the trade mark has been used in India;
(ii) that the trade mark has been registered;
(iii) that the application for registration of the trade mark has been filed in India;
(iv) that the trade mark— (a) is well-known in; or (b) has been registered in; or (c) in respect of which an application for registration has been filed in, any jurisdiction other than India, or (v) that the trade mark is well-known to the public at large in India.
(10) While considering an application for registration of a trade mark and opposition filed in respect thereof, the Registrar shall— (i) protect a well-known trade mark against the identical or similar trade marks;
(ii) take into consideration the bad faith involved either of the applicant or the opponent affecting the right relating to the trade mark.
(11) Where a trade mark has been registered in good faith disclosing the material informations to the Registrar or where right to a trade mark has been acquired through use in good faith before the commencement of this Act, then, nothing in this Act shall prejudice the validity of the registration of that trade mark or right to use that trade mark on the ground that such trade mark is identical with or similar to a well-known trade mark.
12. Registration in the case of honest concurrent use, etc.—In the case of honest concurrent use or of other special circumstances which in the opinion of the Registrar, make it proper so to do, he may permit the registration by more than one proprietor of the trade marks which are identical or similar (whether any such trade mark is already registered or not) in respect of the same or similar goods or services, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as the Registrar may think fit to impose.
13. Prohibition of registration of names of chemical elements or international non-proprietary names.—No word— (a) which is the commonly used and accepted name of any single chemical element or any single chemical compound (as distinguished from a mixture) in respect of a chemical substance or preparation, or (b) which is declared by the World Health Organisation and notified in the prescribed manner by the Registrar from time to time, as an international non-proprietary name or which is deceptively similar to such name, shall be registered as a trade mark and any such registration shall be deemed for the purpose of section 57 to be an entry made in the register without sufficient cause or an entry wrongly remaining on the register, as the circumstances may require.
14. Use of names and representations of living persons or persons recently dead.—Where an application is made for the registration of a trade mark which falsely suggests a connection with any living person, or a person whose death took place within twenty years prior to the date of application for registration of the trade mark, the Registrar may, before he proceeds with the application, require the

applicant to furnish him with the consent in writing of such living person or, as the case may be, of the legal representative of the deceased person to the connection appearing on the trade mark, and may refuse to proceed with the application unless the applicant furnishes the Registrar with such consent.
15. Registration of parts of trade marks and of trade marks as a series.—(1) Where the proprietor of a trade mark claims to be entitled to the exclusive use of any part thereof separately, he may apply to register the whole and the part as separate trade marks.
(2) Each such separate trade mark shall satisfy all the conditions applying to and have all the incidents of, an independent trade mark.
(3) Where a person claiming to be the proprietor of several trade marks in respect of the same or similar goods or services or description of goods or description of services, which, while resembling each other in the material particulars thereof, yet differ in respect of— (a) statement of the goods or services in relation to which they are respectively used or proposed to be used; or (b) statement of number, price, quality or names of places; or (c) other matter of a non-distinctive character which does not substantially affect the identity of the trade mark; or (d) colour, seeks to register those trade marks, they may be registered as a series in one registration.
16. Registration of trade marks as associated trade marks.—(1) Where a trade mark which is registered, or is the subject of an application for registration, in respect of any goods or services is identical with another trade mark which is registered, or is the subject of an application for registration, in the name of the same proprietor in respect of the same goods or description of goods or same services or description of services or so nearly resembles it as to be likely to deceive or cause confusion if used by a person other than the proprietor, the Registrar may, at any time, require that the trade marks shall be entered on the register as associated trade marks.
(2) Where there is an identity or near resemblance of marks that are registered, or are the subject of applications for registration in the name of the same proprietor, in respect of goods and services which are associated with those goods or services, or goods or services of that description, sub-section (1) shall apply as it applies as where there is an identity or near resemblance of marks that are registered, or are the subject of applications for registration, in the name of the same proprietor in respect of the same goods or description of goods or same services or description of services.
(3) Where a trade mark and any part thereof are, in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 15, registered as separate trade marks in the name of the same proprietor, they shall be deemed to be, and shall be registered as, associated trade marks.
(4) All trade marks registered in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 15 as a series in one registration shall be deemed to be, and shall be registered as, associated trade marks.
(5) On application made in the prescribed manner by the registered proprietor of two or more trade marks registered as associated trade marks, the Registrar may dissolve the association as respects any of them if he is satisfied that there would be no likelihood of deception or confusion being caused if that trade mark were used by any other person in relation to any of the goods or services or both in respect of which it is registered, and may amend the register accordingly.
17. Effect of registration of parts of a mark.—(1) When a trade mark consists of several matters, its registration shall confer on the proprietor exclusive right to the use of the trade mark taken as a whole.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), when a trade mark— (a) contains any part— (i) which is not the subject of a separate application by the proprietor for registration as a trade mark; or

(ii) which is not separately registered by the proprietor as a trade mark; or (b) contains any matter which is common to the trade or is otherwise of a non-distinctive character, the registration thereof shall not confer any exclusive right in the matter forming only a part of the whole of the trade mark so registered.

CHAPTER III
PROCEDURE FOR AND DURATION OF REGISTRATION
18. Application for registration.—(1) Any person claiming to be the proprietor of a trade mark used or proposed to be used by him, who is desirous of registering it, shall apply in writing to the Registrar in the prescribed manner for the registration of his trade mark.
(2) A single application may be made for registration of a trade mark for different classes of goods and services and fee payable therefor shall be in respect of each such class of goods or services.
(3) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be filed in the office of the Trade Marks Registry within whose territorial limits the principal place of business in India of the applicant or in the case of joint applicants the principal place of business in India of the applicant whose name is first mentioned in the application as having a place of business in India, is situate:
Provided that where the applicant or any of the joint applicants does not carry on business in India, the application shall be filed in the office of the Trade Marks Registry within whose territorial limits the place mentioned in the address for service in India as disclosed in the application, is situate.
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Registrar may refuse the application or may accept it absolutely or subject to such amendments, modifications, conditions or limitations, if any, as he may think fit.
(5) In the case of a refusal or conditional acceptance of an application, the Registrar shall record in writing the grounds for such refusal or conditional acceptance and the materials used by him in arriving at his decision.
19. Withdrawal of acceptance.—Where, after the acceptance of an application for registration of a trade mark but before its registration, the Registrar is satisfied— (a) that the application has been accepted in error; or (b) that in the circumstances of the case the trade mark should not be registered or should be registered subject to conditions or limitations or to conditions additional to or different from the conditions or limitations subject to which the application has been accepted, the Registrar may, after hearing the applicant if he so desires, withdraw the acceptance and proceed as if the application had not been accepted.
20. Advertisement of application.—(1) When an application for registration of a trade mark has been accepted, whether absolutely or subject to conditions or limitations, the Registrar shall, as soon as may be after acceptance, cause the application as accepted together with the conditions or limitations, if any, subject to which it has been accepted, to be advertised in the prescribed manner:
Provided that the Registrar may cause the application to be advertised before acceptance if it relates to a trade mark to which sub-section (1) of section 9 and sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 11 apply, or in any other case where it appears to him that it is expedient by reason of any exceptional circumstances so to do.
(2) Where— (a) an application has been advertised before acceptance under sub-section (1); or (b) after advertisement of an application,— (i) an error in the application has been corrected; or

(ii) the application has been permitted to be amended under section 22, the Registrar may in his discretion cause the application to be advertised again or in any case falling under clause (b) may, instead of causing the application to be advertised again, notify in the prescribed manner the correction or amendment made in the application.

21. Opposition to registration.—1[(1) Any person may, within four months from the date of the advertisement or re-advertisement of an application for registration, give notice in writing in the prescribed manner and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, to the Registrar, of opposition to the registration.] (2) The Registrar shall serve a copy of the notice on the applicant for registration and, within two months from the receipt by the applicant of such copy of the notice of opposition, the applicant shall send to the Registrar in the prescribed manner a counterstatement of the grounds on which he relies for his application, and if he does not do so he shall be deemed to have abandoned his application.
(3) If the applicant sends such counter-statement, the Registrar shall serve a copy thereof on the person giving notice of opposition.
(4) Any evidence upon which the opponent and the applicant may rely shall be submitted in the prescribed manner and within the prescribed time to the Registrar, and the Registrar shall give an opportunity to them to be heard, if they so desire.
(5) The Registrar shall, after hearing the parties, if so required, and considering the evidence, decide whether and subject to what conditions or limitations, if any, the registration is to be permitted, and may take into account a ground of objection whether relied upon by the opponent or not.
(6) Where a person giving notice of opposition or an applicant sending a counter-statement after receipt of a copy of such notice neither resides nor carries on business in India, the Registrar may require him to give security for the costs of proceedings before him, and in default of such security being duly given, may treat the opposition or application, as the case may be, as abandoned.
(7) The Registrar may, on request, permit correction of any error in, or any amendment of, a notice of opposition or a counter-statement on such terms as he thinks just.
22. Correction and amendment.—The Registrar may, on such terms as he thinks just, at any time, whether before or after acceptance of an application for registration under section 18, permit the correction of any error in or in connection with the application or permit an amendment of the application:
Provided that if an amendment is made to a single application referred to in sub-section (2) of section 18 involving division of such application into two or more applications, the date of making of the initial application shall be deemed to be the date of making of the divided applications so divided.
23. Registration.—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 19, when an application for registration of a trade mark has been accepted and either— (a) the application has not been opposed and the time for notice of opposition has expired; or (b) the application has been opposed and the opposition has been decided in favour of the applicant, the Registrar shall, unless the Central Government otherwise directs, register the said trade mark 2[within eighteen months of the filing of the application] and the trade mark when registered shall be registered as of the date of the making of the said application and that date shall, subject to the provisions of section 154, be deemed to be the date of registration.
(2) On the registration of a trade mark, the Registrar shall issue to the applicant a certificate in the prescribed form of the registration thereof, sealed with the seal of the Trade Marks Registry.

1. Subs. by Act 40 of 2010, s. 3, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 8-7-2013).

(3) Where registration of a trade mark is not completed within twelve months from the date of the application by reason of default on the part of the applicant, the Registrar may, after giving notice to the applicant in the prescribed manner, treat the application as abandoned unless it is completed within the time specified in that behalf in the notice.
(4) The Registrar may amend the register or a certificate of registration for the purpose of correcting a clerical error or an obvious mistake.
24. Jointly owned trade marks.—(1) Save as provided in sub-section (2), nothing in this Act shall authorise the registration of two or more persons who use a trade mark independently, or propose so as to use it, as joint proprietors thereof.
(2) Where the relations between two or more persons interested in a trade mark are such that no one of them is entitled as between himself and the other or others of them to use it except— (a) on behalf of both or all of them; or\ (b) in relation to an article or service with which both or all of them are connected in the course of trade, those persons may be registered as joint proprietors of the trade mark, and this Act shall have effect in relation to any rights to the use of the trade mark vested in those persons as if those rights had been vested in a single person.
25. Duration, renewal, removal and restoration of registration.—(1) The registration of a trade mark, after the commencement of this Act, shall be for a period of ten years, but may be renewed from time to time in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(2) The Registrar shall, on application made by the registered proprietor of a trade mark in the prescribed manner and within the prescribed period and subject to payment of the prescribed fee, renew the registration of the trade mark for a period of ten years from the date of expiration of the original registration or of the last renewal of registration, as the case may be (which date is in this section referred to as the expiration of the last registration).
(3) At the prescribed time before the expiration of the last registration of a trade mark the Registrar shall send notice in the prescribed manner to the registered proprietor of the date of expiration and the conditions as to payment of fees and otherwise upon which a renewal of registration may be obtained, and, if at the expiration of the time prescribed in that behalf those conditions have not been duly complied with the Registrar may remove the trade mark from the register:
Provided that the Registrar shall not remove the trade mark from the register if an application is made in the prescribed form and the prescribed fee and surcharge is paid within six months from the expiration of the last registration of the trade mark and shall renew the registration of the trade mark for a period of ten years under sub-section (2).
(4) Where a trade mark has been removed from the register for non-payment of the prescribed fee, the Registrar shall, after six months and within one year from the expiration of the last registration of the trade mark, on receipt of an application in the prescribed form and on payment of the prescribed fee, if satisfied that it is just so to do, restore the trade mark to the register and renew the registration of the trade mark either generally or subject to such conditions or limitations as he thinks fit to impose, for a period of ten years from the expiration of the last registration.
26. Effect of removal from register for failure to pay fee for renewal.—Where a trade mark has been removed from the register for failure to pay the fee for renewal, it shall nevertheless, for the purpose of any application for the registration of another trade mark during one year, next after the date of the removal, be deemed to be a trade mark already on the register, unless the tribunal is satisfied either— (a) that there has been no bona fide trade use of the trade mark which has been removed during the two years immediately preceding its removal; or (b) that no deception or confusion would be likely to arise from the use of the trade mark which is the subject of the application for registration by reason of any previous use of the trade mark which has been removed.

CHAPTER IV
EFFECT OF REGISTRATION
27. No action for infringement of unregistered trade mark.—(1) No person shall be entitled to institute any proceeding to prevent, or to recover damages for, the infringement of an unregistered trade mark.
(2) Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to affect rights of action against any person for passing off goods or services as the goods of another person or as services provided by another person, or the remedies in respect thereof.
28. Rights conferred by registration.—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the registration of a trade mark shall, if valid, give to the registered proprietor of the trade mark the exclusive right to the use of the trade mark in relation to the goods or services in respect of which the trade mark is registered and to obtain relief in respect of infringement of the trade mark in the manner provided by this Act.
(2) The exclusive right to the use of a trade mark given under sub-section (1) shall be subject to any conditions and limitations to which the registration is subject.
(3) Where two or more persons are registered proprietors of trade marks, which are identical with or nearly resemble each other, the exclusive right to the use of any of those trade marks shall not (except so far as their respective rights are subject to any conditions or limitations entered on the register) be deemed to have been acquired by any one of those persons as against any other of those persons merely by registration of the trade marks but each of those persons has otherwise the same rights as against other persons (not being registered users using by way of permitted use) as he would have if he were the sole registered proprietor.
29. Infringement of registered trade marks.—(1) A registered trade mark is infringed by a person who, not being a registered proprietor or a person using by way of permitted use, uses in the course of trade, a mark which is identical with, or deceptively similar to, the trade mark in relation to goods or services in respect of which the trade mark is registered and in such manner as to render the use of the mark likely to be taken as being used as a trade mark.
(2) A registered trade mark is infringed by a person who, not being a registered proprietor or a person using by way of permitted use, uses in the course of trade, a mark which because of— (a) its identity with the registered trade mark and the similarity of the goods or services covered by such registered trade mark; or (b) its similarity to the registered trade mark and the identity or similarity of the goods or services covered by such registered trade mark; or (c) its identity with the registered trade mark and the identity of the goods or services covered by such registered trade mark, is likely to cause confusion on the part of the public, or which is likely to have an association with the registered trade mark.
(3) In any case falling under clause (c) of sub-section (2), the court shall presume that it is likely to cause confusion on the part of the public.
(4) A registered trade mark is infringed by a person who, not being a registered proprietor or a person using by way of permitted use, uses in the course of trade, a mark which— (a) is identical with or similar to the registered trade mark; and (b) is used in relation to goods or services which are not similar to those for which the trade mark is registered; and (c) the registered trade mark has a reputation in India and the use of the mark without due cause takes unfair advantage of or is detrimental to, the distinctive character or repute of the registered trade mark.

(5) A registered trade mark is infringed by a person if he uses such registered trade mark, as his trade name or part of his trade name, or name of his business concern or part of the name, of his business concern dealing in goods or services in respect of which the trade mark is registered.
(6) For the purposes of this section, a person uses a registered mark, if, in particular, he— (a) affixes it to goods or the packaging thereof;
(b) offers or exposes goods for sale, puts them on the market, or stocks them for those purposes under the registered trade mark, or offers or supplies services under the registered trade mark;
(c) imports or exports goods under the mark; or (d) uses the registered trade mark on business papers or in advertising.
(7) A registered trade mark is infringed by a person who applies such registered trade mark to a material intended to be used for labeling or packaging goods, as a business paper, or for advertising goods or services, provided such person, when he applied the mark, knew or had reason to believe that the application of the mark was not duly authorised by the proprietor or a licensee.
(8) A registered trade mark is infringed by any advertising of that trade mark if such advertising— (a) takes unfair advantage of and is contrary to honest practices in industrial or commercial matters; or (b) is detrimental to its distinctive character; or (c) is against the reputation of the trade mark.
(9) Where the distinctive elements of a registered trade mark consist of or include words, the trade mark may be infringed by the spoken use of those words as well as by their visual representation and reference in this section to the use of a mark shall be construed accordingly.
30. Limits on effect of registered trade mark.—(1) Nothing in section 29 shall be construed as preventing the use of a registered trade mark by any person for the purposes of identifying goods or services as those of the proprietor provided the use— (a) is in accordance with honest practices in industrial or commercial matters, and (b) is not such as to take unfair advantage of or be detrimental to the distinctive character or repute of the trade mark.
(2) A registered trade mark is not infringed where— (a) the use in relation to goods or services indicates the kind, quality, quantity, intended purpose, value, geographical origin, the time of production of goods or of rendering of services or other characteristics of goods or services;
(b) a trade mark is registered subject to any conditions or limitations, the use of the trade mark in any manner in relation to goods to be sold or otherwise traded in, in any place, or in relation to goods to be exported to any market or in relation to services for use or available for acceptance in any place or country outside India or in any other circumstances, to which, having regard to those conditions or limitations, the registration does not extend;
(c) the use by a person of a trade mark— (i) in relation to goods connected in the course of trade with the proprietor or a registered user of the trade mark if, as to those goods or a bulk of which they form part, the registered proprietor or the registered user conforming to the permitted use has applied the trade mark and has not subsequently removed or obliterated it, or has at any time expressly or impliedly consented to the use of the trade mark; or (ii) in relation to services to which the proprietor of such mark or of a registered user conforming to the permitted use has applied the mark, where the purpose and effect of the use of the mark is to indicate, in accordance with the fact, that those services have been performed by the proprietor or a registered user of the mark;

(d) the use of a trade mark by a person in relation to goods adapted to form part of, or to be accessory to, other goods or services in relation to which the trade mark has been used without infringement of the right given by registration under this Act or might for the time being be so used, if the use of the trade mark is reasonably necessary in order to indicate that the goods or services are so adapted, and neither the purpose nor the effect of the use of the trade mark is to indicate, otherwise than in accordance with the fact, a connection in the course of trade between any person and the goods or services, as the case may be;
(e) the use of a registered trade mark, being one of two or more trade marks registered under this Act which are identical or nearly resemble each other, in exercise of the right to the use of that trade mark given by registration under this Act.
(3) Where the goods bearing a registered trade mark are lawfully acquired by a person, the sale of the goods in the market or otherwise dealing in those goods by that person or by a person claiming under or through him is not infringement of a trade mark by reason only of— (a) the registered trade mark having been assigned by the registered proprietor to some other person, after the acquisition of those goods; or (b) the goods having been put on the market under the registered trade mark by the proprietor or with his consent.
(4) Sub-section (3) shall not apply where there exists legitimate reasons for the proprietor to oppose further dealings in the goods in particular, where the condition of the goods, has been changed or impaired after they have been put on the market.
31. Registration to be prima facie evidence of validity.—(1) In all legal proceedings relating to a trade mark registered under this Act (including applications under section 57), the original registration of the trade mark and of all subsequent assignments and transmissions of the trade mark shall be prima facie evidence of the validity thereof.
(2) In all legal proceedings as aforesaid a registered trade mark shall not be held to be invalid on the ground that it was not a registrable trade mark under section 9 except upon evidence of distinctiveness and that such evidence was not submitted to the Registrar before registration, if it is proved that the trade mark had been so used by the registered proprietor or his predecessor in title as to have become distinctive at the date of registration.
32. Protection of registration on ground of distinctiveness in certain cases.—Where a trade mark is registered in breach of sub-section (1) of section 9, it shall not be declared invalid if, in consequence of the use which has been made of it, it has after registration and before commencement of any legal proceedings challenging the validity of such registration, acquired a distinctive character in relation to the goods or services for which it is registered.
33. Effect of acquiescence.—(1) Where the proprietor of an earlier trade mark has acquiesced for a continuous period of five years in the use of a registered trade mark, being aware of that use, he shall no longer be entitled on the basis of that earlier trade mark— (a) to apply for a declaration that the registration of the later trade mark is invalid, or (b) to oppose the use of the later trade mark in relation to the goods or services in relation to which it has been so used, unless the registration of the later trade mark was not applied in good faith.
(2) Where sub-section (1) applies, the proprietor of the later trade mark is not entitled to oppose the use of the earlier trade mark, or as the case may be, the exploitation of the earlier right, notwithstanding that the earlier trade mark may no longer be invoked against his later trade mark.
34. Saving for vested rights.—Nothing in this Act shall entitle the proprietor or a registered user of registered trade mark to interfere with or restrain the use by any person of a trade mark identical with or nearly resembling it in relation to goods or services in relation to which that person or a predecessor in title of his has continuously used that trade mark from a date prior—

(a) to the use of the first-mentioned trade mark in relation to those goods or services by the proprietor or a predecessor in title of his; or (b) to the date of registration of the first-mentioned trade mark in respect of those goods or services in the name of the proprietor of a predecessor in title of his;
whichever is the earlier, and the Registrar shall not refuse (on such use being proved) to register the second mentioned trade mark by reason only of the registration of the first-mentioned trade mark.
35. Saving for use of name, address or description of goods or services.—Nothing in this Act shall entitle the proprietor or a registered user of a registered trade mark to interfere with any bona fide use by a person of his own name or that of his place of business, or of the name, or of the name of the place of business, of any of his predecessors in business, or the use by any person of any bona fide description of the character or quality of his goods or services.
36. Saving for words used as name or description of an article or substance or service.—(1) The registration of a trade mark shall not be deemed to have become invalid by reason only of any use after the date of the registration of any word or words which the trade mark contains or of which it consists as the name or description of an article or substance or service:
Provided that, if it is proved either— (a) that there is a well known and established use of the said word as the name or description of the article or substance or service by a person or persons carrying on trade therein, not being use in relation to goods or services connected in the course of trade with the proprietor or a registered user of the trade mark or (in the case of a certification trade mark) in relation to goods or services certified by the proprietor; or (b) that the article or substance was formerly manufactured under a patent that a period of two years or more after the cesser of the patent has elapsed and that the said word is the only practicable name or description of the article or substance, the provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply.
(2) Where the facts mentioned in clause (a) or clause (b) of the proviso to sub-section (1) are proved with respect to any words, then,— (a) for the purposes of any proceedings under section 57 if the trade mark consists solely of such words, the registration of the trade mark, so far as regards registration in respect of the article or substance in question or of any goods of the same description, or of the services or of any services of the same description, as the case requires, shall be deemed to be an entry wrongly remaining on the register;
(b) for the purposes of any other legal proceedings relating to the trade mark,— (i) if the trade mark consists solely of such words, all rights of the proprietor under this Act or any other law to the use of the trade mark; or (ii) if the trade mark contains such words and other matter, all such right of the proprietor to the use of such words, in relation to the article or substance or to any goods of the same description, or to the service or to any services of the same description, as the case requires, shall be deemed to have ceased on the date on which the use mentioned in clause (a) of the proviso to sub-section (1) first became well known and established or at the expiration of the period of two years mentioned in clause (b) of the said proviso.

1[CHAPTER IVA
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO PROTECTION OF TRADE MARKS THROUGH INTERNATIONAL REGISTRATION UNDER THE MADRID PROTOCOL 36A. Application of Act in case of international registration under Madrid Protocol.—The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to international applications and international registrations under the Madrid Protocol.
36B. Definitions.—In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,— (a) ―application‖, in relation to a Contracting State or a Contracting Organisation, means an application made by a person who is a citizen of, or is domiciled in, or has a real and effective industrial or commercial establishment in, that Contracting State or a State which is a member of that Contracting Organisation, as the case may be.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, ―real and effective industrial or commercial establishment‖ means and includes any establishment where some bona fide industrial or commercial activity takes place and need not necessarily be the principal place of business;
(b) ―basic application‖ means an application for the registration of a trade mark filed under section 18 and which is used as a basis for applying for an international registration;
(c) ―basic registration‖ means the registration of a trade mark under section 23 and which is used as a basis for applying for an international registration;
(d) ―Common Regulations‖ means the Regulations concerning the implementation of the Madrid Protocol;
(e) ―Contracting Organisation‖ means a Contracting Party that is an intergovernmental organisation;
(f) ―Contracting Party‖ means a Contracting State or Contracting Organisation party to the Madrid Protocol;
(g) ―Contracting State‖ means a country party to the Madrid Protocol;
(h) ―international application‖ means an application for international registration or for extension of the protection resulting from an international registration to any Contracting Party made under the Madrid Protocol;
(i) ―International Bureau‖ means the International Bureau of the World Intellectual Property Organisation;
(j) ―international registration‖ means the registration of a trade mark in the register of the International Bureau effected under the Madrid Protocol;
(k) ―Madrid Agreement‖ means the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration of Marks adopted at Madrid on the 14th day of April, 1891, as subsequently revised and amended;
(l) ―Madrid Protocol‖ means the Protocol relating to the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration of Marks adopted at Madrid on the 27th day of June, 1989, as amended from time to time.
36C. Trade Marks Registry to deal with international applications.—Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3) of section 5, an international application shall be dealt with by the head office of the Trade Marks Registry or such branch office of the Registry, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
36D. International application originating from India.—(1) Where an application for the registration of a trade mark has been made under section 18 or a trade mark has been registered under section 23, the applicant or the registered proprietor may make an international application on the form prescribed by the Common Regulations for international registration of that trade mark.

1. Ins. by Act 40 of 2010, s. 5 (w.e.f. 8-7-2013).

(2) A person holding an international registration may make an international application on the form prescribed by the Common Regulations for extension of the protection resulting from such registration to any other Contracting Party.
(3) An international application under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall designate the Contracting Parties where the protection resulting from the international registration is required.
(4) The Registrar shall certify in the prescribed manner that the particulars appearing in the international application correspond to the particulars appearing, at the time of the certification, in the application under section 18 or the registration under section 23, and shall indicate the date and number of that application or the date and number of that registration as well as the date and number of the application from which that registration resulted, as the case may be, and shall within the prescribed period, forward the international application to the International Bureau for registration, also indicating the date of the international application.
(5) Where at any time before the expiry of a period of five years of an international registration, whether such registration has been transferred to another person or not, the application under section 18 or the registration under section 23, as the case may be, has been withdrawn or cancelled or has expired or has been finally refused in respect of all or some of the goods or services listed in the international registration, the protection resulting from such international registration shall cease to have effect:
Provided that where an appeal is made against the decision of registration and an action requesting for withdrawal of application or an opposition to the application has been initiated before the expiry of the period of five years of an international registration, any final decision resulting into withdrawal, cancellation, expiration or refusal shall be deemed to have taken place before the expiry of five years of the international registration.
(6) The Registrar shall, during the period of five years beginning with the date of international registration, transmit to the International Bureau every information referred to in sub-section (5).
(7) The Registrar shall notify the International Bureau the cancellation to be effected to an international registration keeping in view the current status of the basic application or the basic registration, as the case may be.
36E. International registrations where India has been designated.—(1) The Registrar shall, after receipt of an advice from the International Bureau about any international registration where India has been designated, keep a record of the particulars of that international registration in the prescribed manner.
(2) Where, after recording the particulars of any international registration referred to in sub-section (1), the Registrar is satisfied that in the circumstances of the case the protection of trade mark in India should not be granted or such protection should be granted subject to conditions or limitations or to conditions additional to or different from the conditions or limitations subject to which the international registration has been accepted, he may, after hearing the applicant if he so desires, refuse grant of protection and inform the International Bureau in the prescribed manner within eighteen months from the date on which the advice referred to in sub-section (1) was received.
(3) Where the Registrar finds nothing in the particulars of an international registration to refuse grant of protection under sub-section (2), he shall within the prescribed period cause such international registration to be advertised in the prescribed manner.
(4) The provisions of sections 9 to 21 (both inclusive), 63 and 74 shall apply mutatis mutandis in relation to an international registration as if such international registration was an application for registration of a trade mark under section 18.
(5) When the protection of an international registration has not been opposed and the time for notice of opposition has expired, the Registrar shall within a period of eighteen months of the receipt of advice under sub-section (1) notify the International Bureau its acceptance of extension of protection of the trade mark under such international registration and, in case the Registrar fails to notify the International Bureau, it shall be deemed that the protection has been extended to the trade mark.
(6) Where a registered proprietor of a trade mark makes an international registration of that trade mark and designates India, the international registration from the date of the registration shall be deemed

to replace the registration held in India without prejudice to any right acquired under such previously held registration and the Registrar shall, upon request by the applicant, make necessary entry in the register referred to in sub-section (1) of section 6.
(7) A holder of international registration of a trade mark who designates India and who has not been extended protection in India shall have the same remedy which is available to any person making an application for the registration of a trade mark under section 18 and which has not resulted in registration under section 23.
(8) Where at any time before the expiry of a period of five years of an international registration, whether such registration has been transferred to another person or not, the related basic application or, as the case may be, the basic registration in a Contracting Party other than India has been withdrawn or cancelled or has expired or has been finally refused in respect of all or some of the goods or services listed in the international registration, the protection resulting from such international registration in India shall cease to have effect.
36F. Effects of international registration.—(1) From the date of the international registration of a trade mark where India has been designated or the date of the recording in the register of the International Bureau about the extension of the protection resulting from an international registration of a trade mark to India, the protection of the trade mark in India shall be the same as if the trade mark had been registered in India.
(2) The indication of classes of goods and services given by the applicant shall not bind the Registrar with regard to the determination of the scope of the protection of the trade mark.
36G. Duration and renewal of international registration.—(1) The international registration of a trade mark at the International Bureau shall be for a period of ten years and may be renewed for a period of ten years from the expiry of the preceding period.
(2) Subject to payment of a surcharge prescribed by the rules, a grace period of six months shall be allowed for renewal of the international registration.]
CHAPTER V
ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSMISSION
37. Power of registered proprietor to assign and give receipts.—The person for the time being entered in the register as proprietor of a trade mark shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and to any rights appearing from the register to be vested in any other person, have power to assign the trade mark, and to give effectual receipts for any consideration for such assignment.
38. Assignability and transmissibility of registered trade marks.—Notwithstanding anything in any other law to the contrary, a registered trade mark shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, be assignable and transmissible, whether with or without the goodwill of the business concerned and in respect either of all the goods or services in respect of which the trade mark is registered or of some only of those goods or services.
39. Assignability and transmissibility of unregistered trade marks.—An unregistered trade mark may be assigned or transmitted with or without the goodwill of the business concerned.
40. Restriction on assignment or transmission where multiple exclusive rights would be created.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in sections 38 and 39, a trade mark shall not be assignable or transmissible in a case in which as a result of the assignment or transmission there would in the circumstances subsist, whether under this Act or any other law, exclusive rights in more than one of the persons concerned to the use, in relation to— (a) same goods or services;
(b) same description of goods or services;
(c) goods or services or description of goods or services which are associated with each other,

of trade marks nearly resembling each other or of identical trade mark, if having regard to the similarity of the goods and services and to the similarity of the trade marks, the use of the trade marks in exercise of those rights would be likely to deceive or cause confusion:
Provided that an assignment or transmission shall not be deemed to be invalid under this sub-section if the exclusive rights subsisting as a result thereof in the persons concerned respectively are, having regard to limitations imposed thereon, such as not to be exercisable by two or more of those persons in relation to goods to be sold, or otherwise traded in, within India otherwise than for export therefrom, or in relation to goods to be exported to the same market outside India or in relation to services for use at any place in India or any place outside India in relation to services available for acceptance in India.
(2) The proprietor of a registered trade mark who proposes to assign it may submit to the Registrar in the prescribed manner a statement of case setting out the circumstances and the Registrar may issue to him a certificate stating whether, having regard to the similarity of the goods or services and of the trade marks referred to in the case, the proposed assignment would or would not be invalid under sub-section (1), and a certificate so issued shall, subject to appeal and unless it is shown that the certificate was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation, be conclusive as to the validity or invalidity under sub-section (1) of the assignment in so far as such validity or invalidity depends upon the facts set out in the case, but, as regards a certificate in favour of validity, only if application for the registration under section 45 of the title of the person becoming entitled is made within six months from the date on which the certificate is issued.
41. Restriction on assignment or transmission when exclusive rights would be created in different parts of India.—Notwithstanding anything in sections 38 and 39, a trade mark shall not be assignable or transmissible in a case in which as a result of the assignment or transmission there would in the circumstances subsist, whether under this Act or any other law— (a) an exclusive right in one of the persons concerned, to the use of the trade mark limited to use in relation to goods to be sold or otherwise traded in, in any place in India, or in relation to services for use, or services available for acceptance in any place in India; and (b) an exclusive right in another of these persons concerned, to the use of a trade mark nearly resembling the first-mentioned trade mark or of an identical trade mark in relation to— (i) the same goods or services; or (ii) the same description of goods or services; or (iii) services which are associated with those goods or goods of that description or goods which are associated with those services or services of that description, limited to use in relation to goods to be sold or otherwise traded in, or services for use, or available for acceptance, in any other place in India:
Provided that in any such case, on application in the prescribed manner by the proprietor of a trade mark who proposes to assign it, or by a person who claims that a registered trade mark has been transmitted to him or to a predecessor in title of his since the commencement of this Act, the Registrar, if he is satisfied that in all the circumstances the use of the trade mark in exercise of the said rights would not be contrary to the public interest may approve the assignment or transmission, and an assignment or transmission so approved shall not, unless it is shown that the approval was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation, be deemed to be invalid under this section or section 40 if application for the registration under section 45 of the title of the person becoming entitled is made within six months from the date on which the approval is given or, in the case of a transmission, was made before that date.
42. Conditions for assignment otherwise than in connection with the goodwill of a business.— Where an assignment of a trade mark, whether registered or unregistered is made otherwise than in connection with the goodwill of the business in which the mark has been or is used, the assignment shall not take effect unless the assignee, not later than the expiration of six months from the date on which the assignment is made or within such extended period, if any, not exceeding three months in the aggregate, as the Registrar may allow, applies to the Registrar for directions with respect to the advertisement of the assignment, and advertises it in such form and manner and within such period as the Registrar may direct.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, an assignment of a trade mark of the following description shall not be deemed to be an assignment made otherwise than in connection with the goodwill of the business in which the mark is used, namely:— (a) an assignment of a trade mark in respect only of some of the goods or services for which the trade mark is registered accompanied by the transfer of the goodwill of the business concerned in those goods or services only; or (b) an assignment of a trade mark which is used in relation to goods exported from India or in relation to services for use outside India if the assignment is accompanied by the transfer of the goodwill of the export business only.
43. Assignability and transmissibility of certification trade marks.—A certification trade mark shall not be assignable or transmissible otherwise than with the consent of the Registrar, for which application shall be made in writing in the prescribed manner.
44. Assignability and transmissibility of associated trade marks.—Associated trade marks shall be assignable and transmissible only as a whole and not separately, but, subject to the provisions of this Act, they shall, for all other purposes, be deemed to have been registered as separate trade mark.
1[45. Registration of assignments and transmissions.—(1) Where a person becomes entitled by assignment or transmission to a registered trade mark, he shall apply in the prescribed manner to the Registrar to register his title, and the Registrar shall, on receipt of the application, register him as the proprietor of the trade mark in respect of the goods or services in respect of which the assignment or transmission has effect, and shall cause particulars of such assignment or transmission to be entered on the register.
(2) The Registrar may require the applicant to furnish evidence or further evidence in proof of title only where there is a reasonable doubt about the veracity of any statement or any document furnished.
(3) Where the validity of an assignment or transmission is in dispute between the parties, the Registrar may refuse to register the assignment or transmission until the rights of the parties have been determined by a competent court and in all other cases the Registrar shall dispose of the application within the prescribed period.
(4) Until an application under sub-section (1) has been filed, the assignment or transmission shall be ineffective against a person acquiring a conflicting interest in or under the registered trade mark without the knowledge of assignment or transmission.]
CHAPTER VI
USE OF TRADE MARKS AND REGISTERED USERS
46. Proposed use of trade mark by company to be formed, etc.—(1) No application for the registration of a trade mark in respect of any goods or services shall be refused nor shall permission for such registration be withheld, on the ground only that it appears that the applicant does not use or propose to use the trade mark if the Registrar is satisfied that— (a) a company is about to be formed and registered under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) and that the applicant intends to assign the trade mark to that company with a view to the use thereof in relation to those goods or services by the company, or (b) the proprietor intends it to be used by a person, as a registered user after the registration of the trade mark.
(2) The provisions of section 47 shall have effect, in relation to a trade mark registered under the powers conferred by this sub-section, as if for the reference, in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of that section, to the intention on the part of an applicant for registration that a trade mark should be used by him there were substituted a reference to the intention on his part that it should be used by the company or registered user concerned.

1. Subs. by Act 40 of 2010, s. 6, for section 45 (w.e.f. 8-7-2013).

(3) The tribunal may, in a case to which sub-section (1) applies, require the applicant to give security for the costs of any proceedings relating to any opposition or appeal, and in default of such security being duly given, may treat the application as abandoned.
(4) Where in a case to which sub-section (1) applies, a trade mark in respect of any goods or services is registered in the name of an applicant who, relies on intention to assign the trade mark to a company, then, unless within such period as may be prescribed or within such further period not exceeding six months as the Registrar may, on application being made to him in the prescribed manner, allow, the company has been registered as the proprietor of the trade mark in respect of those goods or services, the registration shall cease to have effect in respect thereof at the expiration of that period and the Registrar shall amend the register accordingly.
47. Removal from register and imposition of limitations on ground of non-use.—(1) A registered trade mark may be taken off the register in respect of the goods or services in respect of which it is registered on application made in the prescribed manner to the Registrar or the Appellate Board by any person aggrieved on the ground either— (a) that the trade mark was registered without any bona fide intention on the part of the applicant for registration that it should be used in relation to those goods or services by him or, in a case to which the provisions of section 46 apply, by the company concerned or the registered user, as the case may be, and that there has, in fact, been no bona fide use of the trade mark in relation to those goods or services by any proprietor thereof for the time being up to a date three months before the date of the application; or (b) that up to a date three months before the date of the application, a continuous period of five years from the date on which the trade mark is actually entered in the register or longer had elapsed during which the trade mark was registered and during which there was no bona fide use thereof in relation to those goods or services by any proprietor thereof for the time being:
Provided that except where the applicant has been permitted under section 12 to register an identical or nearly resembling trade mark in respect of the goods or services in question, or where the tribunal is of opinion that he might properly be permitted so to register such a trade mark, the tribunal may refuse an application under clause (a) or clause (b) in relation to any goods or services, if it is shown that there has been, before the relevant date or during the relevant period, as the case may be, bona fide use of the trade mark by any proprietor thereof for the time being in relation to— (i) goods or services of the same description; or (ii) goods or services associated with those goods or services of that description being goods or services, as the case may be, in respect of which the trade mark is registered.
(2) Where in relation to any goods or services in respect of which a trade mark is registered— (a) the circumstances referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) are shown to exist so far as regards non-use of the trade mark in relation to goods to be sold, or otherwise traded in a particular place in India (otherwise than for export from India), or in relation to goods to be exported to a particular market outside India; or in relation to services for use or available for acceptance in a particular place in India or for use in a particular market outside India; and (b) a person has been permitted under section 12 to register an identical or nearly resembling trade mark in respect of those goods, under a registration extending to use in relation to goods to be so sold, or otherwise traded in, or in relation to goods to be so exported, or in relation to services for use or available for acceptance in that place or for use in that country, or the tribunal is of opinion that he might properly be permitted so to register such a trade mark, on application by that person in the prescribed manner to the Appellate Board or to the Registrar, the tribunal may impose on the registration of the first-mentioned trade mark such limitations as it thinks proper for securing that that registration shall cease to extend to such use.
(3) An applicant shall not be entitled to rely for the purpose of clause (b) of sub-section (1) or for the purposes of sub-section (2) on any non-use of a trade mark which is shown to have been due to special circumstances in the trade, which includes restrictions on the use of the trade mark in India imposed by

any law or regulation and not to any intention to abandon or not to use the trade mark in relation to the goods or services to which the application relates.
48. Registered users.—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 49, a person other than the registered proprietor of a trade mark may be registered as a registered user thereof in respect of any or all of the goods or services in respect of which the trade mark is registered.
(2) The permitted use of a trade mark shall be deemed to be used by the proprietor thereof, and shall be deemed not to be used by a person other than the proprietor, for the purposes of section 47 or for any other purpose for which such use is material under this Act or any other law.
49. Registration as registered user.—(1) Where it is proposed that a person should be registered as a registered user of a trade mark, the registered proprietor and the proposed registered user shall jointly apply in writing to the Registrar in the prescribed manner, and every such application shall be accompanied by— (a) the agreement in writing or a duly authenticated copy thereof, entered into between the registered proprietor and the proposed registered user with respect to the permitted use of the trade mark; and (b) an affidavit made by the registered proprietor or by some person authorised to the satisfication of the Registrar to act on his behalf,— (i) giving particulars of the relationship, existing or proposed, between the registered proprietor and the proposed registered user, including particulars showing the degree of control by the proprietor over the permitted use which their relationship will confer and whether it is a term of their relationship that the proposed registered user shall be the sole registered user or that there shall be any other restriction as to persons for whose registration as registered users application may be made;
(ii) stating the goods or services in respect of which registration is proposed;
(iii) stating the conditions or restrictions, if any, proposed with respect to the characteristics of the goods or services, to the mode or place of permitted use, or to any other matter;
(iv) stating whether the permitted use is to be for a period or without limit of period, and, if for a period, the duration thereof; and (c) such further documents or other evidence as may be required by the Registrar or as may be prescribed.
(2) When the requirements of sub-section (1) have been complied with, the Registrar shall register the proposed registered user in respect of the goods or services as to which he is so satisfied.
(3) The Registrar shall issue notice in the prescribed manner of the registration of a person as a registered user, to other registered users of the trade mark, if any.
(4) The Registrar shall, if so requested by the applicant, take steps for securing that information given for the purposes of an application under this section (other than matters entered in the register) is not disclosed to rivals in trade.
50. Power of Registrar for variation or cancellation of registration as registered user.—(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 57, the registration of a person as registered user— (a) may be varied by the Registrar as regards the goods or services in respect of which it has effect on the application in writing in the prescribed manner of the registered proprietor of the trade mark;
(b) may be cancelled by the Registrar on the application in writing in the prescribed manner of the registered proprietor or of the registered user or of any other registered user of the trade mark;
(c) may be cancelled by the Registrar on the application in writing in the prescribed manner of any person on any of the following grounds, namely:—

(i) that the registered user has used the trade mark otherwise than in accordance with the agreement under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 49 or in such way as to cause or to be likely to cause, deception or confusion;
(ii) that the proprietor or the registered user misrepresented, or failed to disclose, some fact material to the application for registration which if accurately represented or disclosed would not have justified the registration of the registered user;
(iii) that the circumstances have changed since the date of registration in such a way that at the date of such application for cancellation they would not have justified registration of the registered user;
(iv) that the registration ought not to have been effected having regard to rights vested in the applicant by virtue of a contract in the performance of which he is interested;
(d) may be cancelled by the Registrar on his own motion or on the application in writing in the prescribed manner by any person, on the ground that any stipulation in the agreement between the registered proprietor and the registered user regarding the quality of the goods or services in relation to which the trade mark is to be used is either not being enforced or is not being complied with;
(e) may be cancelled by the Registrar in respect of any goods or services in relation to which the trade mark is no longer registered.
(2) The Registrar shall issue notice in the prescribed manner in respect of every application under this section to the registered proprietor and each registered user (not being the applicant) of the trade mark.
(3) The procedure for cancelling a registration shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that before cancelling of registration, the registered proprietor shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
51. Power of Registrar to call for information relating to agreement in respect of registered users.—(1) The Registrar may, at any time during the continuance of the registration of the registered user, by notice in writing, require the registered proprietor to confirm to him within one month that the agreement filed under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 49 continues to be in force.
(2) If the registered proprietor fails to furnish the confirmation within one month as required under sub-section (1), the registered user shall cease to be the registered user on the day immediately after the expiry of the said period and the Registrar shall notify the same.
52. Right of registered user to take proceedings against infringement.—(1) Subject to any agreement subsisting between the parties, a registered user may institute proceedings for infringement in his own name as if he were the registered proprietor, making the registered proprietor a defendant and the rights and obligations of such registered user in such case being concurrent with those of the registered proprietor.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, a registered proprietor so added as defendant shall not be liable for any costs unless he enters an appearance and takes part in the proceedings.
53. No right of permitted user to take proceeding against infringement.—A person referred to in sub-clause (ii) of clause (r) of sub-section (1) of section 2 shall have no right to institute any proceeding for any infringement.
54. Registered user not to have right of assignment or transmission.—Nothing in this Act shall confer on a registered user of a trade mark any assignable or transmissible right to the use thereof.
Explanation I.—The right of a registered user of a trade mark shall not be deemed to have been assigned or transmitted within the meaning of this section in the following cases, namely:— (a) where the registered user being an individual enters into a partnership with any other person for carrying on the business concerned; but in any such case the firm may use the trade mark, if otherwise in force, only for so long as the registered user is a member of the firm;

(b) where the registered user being a firm subsequently undergoes a change in its constitution; but in any such case the reconstituted firm may use the trade mark, if otherwise in force, only for so long as any partner of the original firm at the time of its registration as registered user, continues to be a partner of the reconstituted firm.
Explanation II.—For the purposes of Explanation I, ―firm‖ has the same meaning as in the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 1932).
55. Use of one of associated or substantially identical trade marks equivalent to use of another.—(1) Where under the provisions of this Act, use of a registered trade mark is required to be proved for any purpose, the tribunal may, if and, so far as it shall think right, accept use of a registered associated trade mark, or of the trade mark with additions or alterations not substantially affecting its identity, as an equivalent for the use required to be proved.
(2) The use of the whole of a registered trade mark shall, for the purpose of this Act, be deemed to be also use of any trade mark being a part thereof and registered in accordance with sub-section (1) of section 15 in the name of the same proprietor.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in section 32, the use of part of the registered trade mark in sub-section (2) shall not be conclusive as to its evidence of distinctiveness for any purpose under this Act.
56. Use of trade mark for export trade and use when form of trade connection changes.—(1) The application in India of trade mark to goods to be exported from India or in relation to services for use outside India and any other act done in India in relation to goods to be so exported or services so rendered outside India which, if done in relation to goods to be sold or services provided or otherwise traded in within India would constitute use of a trade mark therein, shall be deemed to constitute use of the trade mark in relation to those goods or services for any purpose for which such use is material under this Act or any other law.
(2) The use of a registered trade mark in relation to goods or services between which and the person using the mark any form of connection in the course of trade subsists shall not be deemed to be likely to cause deception or confusion on the ground only that the mark has been or is used in relation to goods or services between which and the said person or a predecessor in title of that person a different form of connection in the course of trade subsisted or subsists.
CHAPTER VII
RECTIFICATION AND CORRECTION OF THE REGISTER
57. Power to cancel or vary registration and to rectify the register.—(1) On application made in the prescribed manner to the Appellate Board or to the Registrar by any person aggrieved, the tribunal may make such order as it may think fit for cancelling or varying the registration of a trade mark on the ground of any contravention, or failure to observe a condition entered on the register in relation thereto.
(2) Any person aggrieved by the absence or omission from the register of any entry, or by any entry made in the register without sufficient cause, or by any entry wrongly remaining on the register, or by any error or defect in any entry in the register, may apply in the prescribed manner to the Appellate Board or to the Registrar, and the tribunal may make such order for making, expunging or varying the entry as it may think fit.
(3) The tribunal may in any proceeding under this section decide any question that may be necessary or expedient to decide in connection with the rectification of the register.
(4) The tribunal, of its own motion, may, after giving notice in the prescribed manner to the parties concerned and after giving them an opportunity of being heard, make any order referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2).
(5) Any order of the Appellate Board rectifying the register shall direct that notice of the rectification shall be served upon the Registrar in the prescribed manner who shall upon receipt of such notice rectify the register accordingly.

58. Correction of register.—(1) The Registrar may, on application made in the prescribed manner by the registered proprietor,— (a) correct any error in the name, address or description of the registered proprietor of a trade mark, or any other entry relating to the trade mark;
(b) enter any change in the name, address or description of the person who is registered as proprietor of a trade mark;
(c) cancel the entry of a trade mark on the register;
(d) strike out any goods or classes of goods or services from those in respect of which a trade mark is registered, and may make any consequential amendment or alteration in the certificate of registration, and for that purpose, may require the certificate of registration to be produced to him.
(2) The Registrar may, on application made in the prescribed manner by a registered user of a trade mark, and after notice to the registered proprietor, correct any error, or enter any change, in the name, address or description of the registered user.
59. Alteration of registered trade marks.—(1) The registered proprietor of a trade mark may apply in the prescribed manner to the Registrar for leave to add to or alter the trade mark in any manner not substantially affecting the identity thereof, and the Registrar may refuse leave or may grant it on such terms and subject to such limitations as he may think fit.
(2) The Registrar may cause an application under this section to be advertised in the prescribed manner in any case where it appears to him that it is expedient so to do, and where he does so, if within the prescribed time from the date of the advertisement any person gives notice to the Registrar in the prescribed manner of opposition to the application, the Registrar shall, after hearing the parties if so required, decide the matter.
(3) Where leave is granted under this section, the trade mark as altered shall be advertised in the prescribed manner, unless the application has already been advertised under sub-section (2).
60. Adaptation of entries in register to amended or substituted classification of goods or services.—(1) The Registrar shall not make any amendment of the register which would have the effect of adding any goods or classes of goods or services to those in respect of which a trade mark is registered (whether in one or more classes) immediately before the amendment is to be made or of antedating the registration of a trade mark in respect of any goods or services:
Provided that this sub-section, shall not apply when the Registrar is satisfied that compliance therewith would involve undue complexity and that the addition or antedating, as the case may be, would not affect any substantial quantity of goods or services and would not substantially prejudice the rights of any person.
(2) A proposal so to amend the register shall be brought to the notice of the registered proprietor of the trade mark affected and advertised in the prescribed manner, and may be opposed before the Registrar by any person aggrieved on the ground that the proposed amendment contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1).
CHAPTER VIII
COLLECTIVE MARKS
61. Special provisions for collective marks.—(1) The provisions of this Act shall apply to collective marks subject to the provisions contained in this Chapter.
(2) In relation to a collective mark the reference in clause (zb) of sub-section (1) of section 2 to distinguishing the goods or services of one person from those of others shall be construed as a reference to distinguishing the goods or services of members of an association of persons which is the proprietor of the mark from those of others.
62. Collective mark not to be misleading as to character or significance.—A collective mark shall not be registered if it is likely to deceive or cause confusion on the part of public in particular if it is likely

to be taken to be something other than a collective mark, and in such case the Registrar may require that a mark in respect of which application is made for registration comprise some indication that it is a collective mark.
63. Application to be accompanied by regulations governing use of collective marks.—(1) An application for registration of a collective mark shall be accompanied by the regulations governing the use of such collective mark.
(2) The regulations referred to in sub-section (1) shall specify the persons authorised to use the mark, the conditions of membership of the association and, the conditions of use of the mark, including any sanctions against misuse and such other matters as may be prescribed.
64. Acceptance of application and regulations by Registrar.—If it appears to the Registrar that the requirements for registration are satisfied, he shall accept the application together with the regulations, either unconditionally or subject to such conditions including amendments of the said regulations, if any, as he may deem fit or refuse to accept it and if accepted shall notify the regulations.
65. Regulations to be open to inspection.—The regulations referred to in sub-section (1) of section 63 shall be open to public inspection in the same way as the register as provided in section 148.
66. Amendment of regulations.—Any amendment of regulations referred to in sub-section (1) of section 63 shall not be effective unless the amended regulations are filed with the Registrar, and accepted and published by him in accordance with section 64.
67. Infringement proceedings by registered proprietor of collective mark.—In a suit for infringement instituted by the registered proprietor of a collective mark as plaintiff the court shall take into account any loss suffered or likely to be suffered by authorised users and may give such directions as it thinks fit as to the extent to which the plaintiff shall hold the proceeds of any pecuniary remedy on behalf of such authorised users.
68. Additional grounds for removal of registration of collective mark.—The registration of a collective mark may also be removed from the register on the ground— (a) that the manner in which the collective mark has been used by the proprietor or authorised user has caused it to become liable to mislead the public as a collective mark; or (b) that the proprietor has failed to observe, or to secure the observance of the regulations governing the use of the mark.
Explanation I.—For the purposes of this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, ―authorised user‖ means a member of an association authorised to use the registered collective mark of the association.
Explanation II.—For the purposes of this Act, use of a collective mark by an authorised user referred to in Explanation I shall be deemed to be the use by the registered proprietor thereof.
CHAPTER IX
CERTIFICATION TRADE MARKS
69. Certain provisions of this Act not applicable to certification trade marks.—The following provisions of this Act shall not apply to certification trade marks, that is to say,— (a) clauses (a) and (c) of sub-section (1) of section 9;
(b) Sections 18, 20 and 21, except as expressly applied by this Chapter;
(c) Sections 28, 29, 30, 41, 42, 47, 48, 49, 50, 52, 54 and sub-section (2) of section 56;
(d) Chapter XII, except section 107.
70. Registration of certification trade marks.—A mark shall not be registrable as a certification trade mark in the name of a person who carries on a trade in goods of the kind certified or a trade of the provision of services of the kind certified.

71. Applications for registration of certification trade marks.—(1) An application for the registration of a mark as a certification trade mark shall be made to the Registrar in the prescribed manner by the person proposed to be registered as the proprietor thereof, and accompanied by a draft for the regulations to be deposited under section 74.
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 70, the provisions of sections 18, 19 and 22 shall apply in relation to an application under this section as they apply in relation to an application under section 18, subject to the modification that references therein to acceptance of an application shall be construed as references to authorisation to proceed with an application.
(3) In dealing under the said provisions with an application under this section, the tribunal shall have regard to the like considerations, so far as relevant, as if the application were applications under section 18 and to any other considerations relevant to applications under this section, including the desirability of securing that a certification trade mark shall comprise some indication that it is a certification trade mark.
72. Consideration of application for registration by Registrar.—(1) The Registrar shall consider the application made under section 71 with regard to the following matters, namely:— (a) whether the applicant is competent to certify the goods in respect of which the mark is to be registered;
(b) whether the draft of the regulations to be filed under section 74 is satisfactory;
(c) whether in all the circumstances the registration applied for would be to the public advantage, and may either— (i) refuse the application; or (ii) accept the application and approve the said draft of the regulations either without modification and unconditionally or subject to any conditions or limitations, or to any amendments or modifications of the application or of the regulations, which he thinks requisite having regard to any of the said matters.
(2) Except in the case of acceptance and approval without modification and unconditionally, the Registrar shall not decide any matter under sub-section (1) without giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard.
73. Opposition to registration of certification trade marks.—When an application has been accepted, the Registrar shall, as soon as may be thereafter, cause the application as accepted to be advertised in the prescribed manner, and the provisions of section 21 shall apply in relation to the registration of the mark as they apply in relation to an application under section 18.
74. Filing of regulations governing use of a certification trade mark.—(1) There shall be filed at the Trade Marks Registry in respect of every mark registered as a certification trade mark regulations for governing the use thereof, which shall include provisions as to the cases in which the proprietor is to certify goods or services and to authorise the use of the certification trade mark, and may contain any other provisions which the Registrar may by general or special order, require or permit to be inserted therein (including provisions conferring a right of appeal to the Registrar against any refusal of the proprietor to certify goods or to authorise the use of the certification trade mark in accordance with the regulations); and regulations so filed shall be open to inspection in like manner as the register as provided in section 148.
(2) The regulations so filed may, on the application of the registered proprietor, be altered by the Registrar.
(3) The Registrar may cause such application to be advertised in any case where it appears to him expedient so to do, and where he does so, if within the time specified in the advertisement any person gives notice of opposition to the application, the Registrar shall not decide the matter without giving the parties an opportunity of being heard.
75. Infringement of certification trade marks.—The right conferred by section 78 is infringed by any person who, not being the registered proprietor of the certification trade mark or a person authorised by him in that behalf under the regulations filed under section 74, using it in accordance therewith, uses in the course of trade, a mark, which is identical with, or deceptively similar to the certification trade mark

in relation to any goods or services in respect of which it is registered, and in such manner as to render the use of the mark likely to be taken as being a use as a trade mark.
76. Acts not constituting infringement of certification trade marks.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the following acts do not constitute an infringement of the right to the use of a registered certification trade mark— (a) where a certification trade mark is registered subject to any conditions or limitations entered on the register, the use of any such mark in any mode, in relation to goods to be sold or otherwise traded in any place, or in relation to goods to be exported to any market or in relation to services for use or available for acceptance in any place, country or territory or in any other circumstances, to which having regard to any such limitations, the registration does not extend;
(b) the use of a certification trade mark in relation to goods or services certified by the proprietor of the mark if, as to those goods or services or a bulk of which they form part, the proprietor or another in accordance with his authorisation under the relevant regulations has applied the mark and has not subsequently removed or obliterated it, or the proprietor has at any time expressly or impliedly consented to the use of the mark;
(c) the use of a certification trade mark in relation to goods or services adapted to form part of, or to be accessory to, other goods in relation to which the mark has been used without infringement of the right given as aforesaid or might for the time being be so used, if the use of the mark is reasonably necessary in order to indicate that the goods or services are so adapted and neither the purpose nor the effect of the use of the mark is to indicate otherwise than in accordance with the fact that the goods or services are certified by the proprietor.
(2) Clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall not apply to the case of use consisting of the application of a certification trade mark to goods or services, notwithstanding that they are such goods or services as are mentioned in that clause if such application is contrary to the regulations referred to in that clause.
(3) Where a certification trade mark is one of two or more trade marks registered under this Act, which are identical or nearly resemble each other, the use of any of those trade marks in exercise of the right to the use of that trade mark given by registration, shall not be deemed to be an infringement of the right so given to the use of any other of those trade marks.
77. Cancellation or varying of registration of certification trade marks.—The Registrar may, on the application in the prescribed manner of any person aggrieved and after giving the proprietor an opportunity of opposing the application, make such order as he thinks fit for expunging or varying any entry in the register to a certification trade mark, or for varying the regulations, on any of the following grounds, namely:— (a) that the proprietor is no longer competent, in the case of any of the goods or services in respect of which the mark is registered, to certify those goods or services;
(b) that the proprietor has failed to observe any provisions of the regulations to be observed on his part;
(c) that it is no longer to the public advantage that the mark should remain registered;
(d) that it is requisite for the public advantage that if the mark remains registered, the regulations should be varied.
78. Rights conferred by registration of certification trade marks.—(1) Subject to the provisions of sections 34, 35 and 76, the registration of a person as a proprietor of certification trade mark in respect of any goods or services shall, if valid, give to that person the exclusive right to the use of the mark in relation to those goods or services.
(2) The exclusive right to the use of a certification trade mark given under sub-section (1) shall be subject to any conditions and limitations to which the registration is subject.

[CHAPTER X.—SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR TEXTILE GOODS.] Omitted by the Trade Marks (Amendment) Act, 2010 (40 of 2010), s. 7 (w.e.f. 8-7-2013).
79. [Textile goods.] Omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 8-7-2013).

80. [Restriction on registration of textile goods.] Omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 8-7-2013).
81. [Stamping of piece goods, cotton yarn and thread.] Omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 8-7-2013).
82. [Determination of character of textile goods by sampling.] Omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 8-7-2013).
CHAPTER XI
APPELLATE BOARD
83. Establishment of Appellate Board.—The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish an Appellate Board to be known as the Intellectual Property Appellate Board to exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act 1[and under the Copyright Act, 1957 (47 of 1957)].
84. Composition of Appellate Board.—(1) The Appellate Board shall consist of a 2[Chairperson], 3[Vice-Chairperson] and such number of other Members, as the Central Government may deem fit and, subject to the other provisions of this Act, the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Appellate Board may be exercised by Benches thereof.
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Bench shall consist of one Judicial Member and one Technical Member and shall sit at such place as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the 2[Chairperson]— (a) may, in addition to discharging the functions of the Judicial Member or Technical Member of the Bench to which he is appointed, discharge the functions of the Judicial Member or, as the case may be, the Technical Member, of any other Bench;
(b) may transfer a Member from one Bench to another Bench;
(c) may authorise the 3[Vice-Chairperson], the Judicial Member or the Technical Member appointed to one Bench to discharge also the functions of the Judicial Member or the Technical Member, as the case may be, of another Bench.
(4) Where any Benches are constituted, the Central Government may, from time to time, by notification, make provisions as to the distribution of the business of the Appellate Board amongst the Benches and specify the matters which may be dealt with by each Bench.
(5) If any question arises as to whether any matter falls within the purview of the business allocated to a Bench, the decision of the 2[Chairperson] shall be final.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the expression ―matter‖ includes an appeal under section 91.
(6) If the Members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the 2[Chairperson] who shall either hear the point or points himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or points by one or more of the other Members and such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of the Members who have heard the case, including those who first heard it.
85. Qualifications for appointment as 2[Chairperson], 3[Vice-Chairperson], or other Members.—(1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the 2[Chairperson] unless he— (a) is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court; or (b) has, for at least two years, held the office of a 3[Vice-Chairperson].
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the 3[Vice-Chairperson], unless he— (a) has, for at least two years, held the office of a Judicial Member or a Technical Member; or

1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 161 (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
2. Subs. by s. 161, ibid., for ―Chairman‖ (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).

(b) has been a Member of the Indian Legal Service and has held a post in Grade I of that Service or any higher post for at least five years.
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judicial Member, unless he— (a) has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and has held the post in Grade I of that Service for at least three years; or (b) has, for at least ten years, held a civil judicial office.
(4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Technical Member, unless he— (a) has, for at least ten years, exercised functions of a tribunal under this Act or under the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958), or both, and has held a post not lower than the post of a Joint Registrar for at least five years; or (b) has, for at least ten years, been an advocate of a proven specialised experience in trade mark law.
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (6), the 1[Chairperson], 2[Vice-Chairperson] and every other Member shall be appointed by the President of India.
(6) No appointment of a person as the 1[Chairperson] shall be made except after consultation with the Chief Justice of India.
86. Term of office of 1[Chairperson], 2[Vice-Chairperson] and other Members.—The 1[Chairperson], 2[Vice-Chairperson] or other Members shall hold office as such for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains,— (a) in the case of 1[Chairperson] and 2[Vice-Chairperson, the age of sixty-five years; and (b) in the case of a Member, the age of sixty-two years, whichever is earlier.
87. 2[Vice-Chairperson] or senior-most Member to act as 1[Chairperson] or discharge his functions in certain circumstances.—(1) In the event of or any vacancy in the office of the 1[Chairperson] by reasons of his death, resignation or otherwise, the 2[Vice-Chairperson] and in his absence the senior-most Member shall act as 1[Chairperson] until the date on which a new 1[Chairperson], appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office.
(2) When the 1[Chairperson] is unable to discharge his functions owing to his absence, illness or any other cause, the 2[Vice-Chairperson] and in his absence the senior-most Member shall discharge the functions of the 1[Chairperson] until the date on which the 1[Chairperson] resumes his duty.
88. Salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of 1[Chairperson], Vice1[Chairperson] and other Members.—(1) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits), of the 1[Chairperson], 2[Vice-Chairperson] and other members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a person who, immediately before the date of assuming office as the 1[Chairperson], 2[Vice-Chairperson] or other Member was in service of Government, shall be deemed to have retired from service on the date on which he enters upon office as the 1[Chairperson], 2[Vice-Chairperson] or other Member.
89. Resignation and removal.—(1) The [Chairperson], [Vice-Chairperson] or any other Member may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the President of India, resign his office:
Provided that the 1[Chairperson], 2[Vice-Chairperson] or any other Member shall, unless he is permitted by the President of India to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is earlier.

(2) The 1[Chairperson], 2[Vice-Chairperson] or any other Member shall not be removed from his office except by an order made by the President of India on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry made by a Judge of the Supreme Court in which the 1[Chairperson], 2[ViceChairperson] or other Member had been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges.
(3) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for the investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the 1[Chairperson], 2[Vice-Chairperson] or other Member referred to in sub-section (2).
3[89A. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and member.—Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the qualifications, appointment, term of office, salaries and allowances, resignations, removal and other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson, ViceChairperson and other Members of the Appellate Board appointed after the commencement of Part XIV of chapter VI of the Finance Act 2017 (7 of 2017), shall be governed by the provisions of section 184 of that Act:
Provided that the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members appointed before the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017 (7 of 2017), shall continue to be governed by the provisions of this Act, and the rules made thereunder as if the provisions of section 184 of the Finance Act, 2017 (7 of 2017), had not come into force.]
90. Staff of Appellate Board.—(1) The Central Government shall determine the nature and categories of the officers and other employees required to assist the Appellate Board in the discharge of its functions and provide the Appellate Board with such officers and other employees as it may think fit.
(2) The salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the Appellate Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The officers and other employees of the Appellate Board shall discharge their functions under the general superintendence of the 1[Chairperson] in the manner as may be prescribed.
91. Appeals to Appellate Board.—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order or decision of the Registrar under this Act, or the rules made thereunder may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Board within three months from the date on which the order or decision sought to be appealed against is communicated to such person preferring the appeal.
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period specified under sub-section (1):
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period specified therefor, if the appellant satisfies the Appellate Board that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the specified period.
(3) An appeal to the Appellate Board shall be in the prescribed form and shall be verified in the prescribed manner and shall be accompanied by a copy of the order or decision appealed against and by such fees as may be prescribed.
92. Procedure and powers of Appellate Board.—(1) The Appellate Board shall not be bound by the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) but shall be guided by principles of natural justice and subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the Appellate Board shall have powers to regulate its own procedure including the fixing of places and times of its hearing.
(2) The Appellate Board shall have, for the purpose of discharging its functions under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:— (a) receiving evidence;

(b) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses;
(c) requisitioning any public record; and (d) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(3) Any proceeding before the Appellate Board shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section 196, of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), and the Appellate Board shall be deemed to be a civil court for all the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
93. Bar of jurisdiction of courts, etc.—No court or other authority shall have or, be entitled to, exercise any jurisdiction, powers or authority in relation to the matters referred to in sub-section (1) of section 91.
94. Bar to appear before Appellate Board.—On ceasing to hold office, the 1[Chairperson], 2[Vice-Chairperson] or other Members shall not appear before the Appellate Board or the Registrar.
95. Conditions as to making of interim orders.—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, no interim order (whether by way of injunction or stay or any other manner) shall be made on, or in any proceedings relating to, an appeal unless— (a) copies of such appeal and of all documents in support of the plea for such interim order are furnished to the party against whom such appeal is made or proposed to be made; and (b) opportunity is given to such party to be heard in the matter.
96. Power of 1[Chairperson] to transfer cases from one Bench to another.—On the application of any of the parties and after notice to the parties, and after hearing such of them as he may desire to be heard, or on his own motion without such notice, the 1[Chairman] may transfer any case pending before one Bench, for disposal, to any other Bench.
97. Procedure for application for rectification, etc., before Appellate Board.—(1) An application for rectification of the register made to the Appellate Board under section 57 shall be in such form as may be prescribed.
(2) A certified copy of every order or judgment of the Appellate Board relating to a registered trade mark under this Act shall be communicated to the Registrar by the Board and the Registrar shall give effect to the order of the Board and shall, when so directed, amend the entries in, or rectify, the register in accordance with such order.
98. Appearance of Registrar in legal proceedings.—(1) The Registrar shall have the right to appear and be heard— (a) in any legal proceedings before the Appellate Board in which the relief sought includes alteration or rectification of the register or in which any question relating to the practice of the Trade Marks Registry is raised;
(b) in any appeal to the Board from an order of the Registrar on an application for registration of a trade mark— (i) which is not opposed, and the application is either refused by the Registrar or is accepted by him subject to any amendments, modifications, conditions or limitations, or (ii) which has been opposed and the Registrar considers that his appearance is necessary in the public interest, and the Registrar shall appear in any case if so directed by the Board.
(2) Unless the Appellate Board otherwise directs, the Registrar may, in lieu of appearing, submit a statement in writing signed by him, giving such particulars as he thinks proper of the proceedings before

him relating to the matter in issue or of the grounds of any decision given by him affecting it, or of the practice of the Trade Marks Registry in like cases, or of other matters relevant to the issues and within his knowledge as Registrar, and such statement shall be evidence in the proceeding.
99. Costs of Registrar in proceedings before Appellate Board.—In all proceedings under this Act before the Appellate Board the costs of the Registrar shall be in the discretion of the Board, but the Registrar shall not be ordered to pay the costs of any of the parties.
100. Transfer of pending proceedings to Appellate Board.—All cases of appeals against any order or decision of the Registrar and all cases pertaining to rectification of register, pending before any High Court, shall be transferred to the Appellate Board from the date as notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette and the Appellate Board may proceed with the matter either de novo or from the stage it was so transferred.
CHAPTER XII OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE
101. Meaning of applying trade marks and trade descriptions.—(1) A person shall be deemed to apply a trade mark or mark or trade description to goods or services who— (a) applies it to the goods themselves or uses it in relation to services; or (b) applies it to any package in or with which the goods are sold, or exposed for sale, or had in possession for sale or for any purpose of trade or manufacture; or (c) places, encloses or annexes any goods which are sold, or exposed for sale, or had in possession for sale or for any purpose of trade or manufacture, in or with any package or other thing to which a trade mark or mark or trade description has been applied; or (d) uses a trade mark or mark or trade description in any manner reasonably likely to lead to the belief that the goods or services in connection with which it is used are designated or described by that trade mark or mark or trade description; or (e) in relation to the goods or services uses a trade mark or trade description in any sign, advertisement, invoice, catalogue, business letter, business paper, price list or other commercial document and goods are delivered or services are rendered to a person in pursuance of a request or order made by reference to the trade mark or trade description as so used.
(2) A trade mark or mark or trade description shall be deemed to be applied to goods whether it is woven in, impressed on, or otherwise worked into, or annexed or affixed to, the goods or to any package or other thing.
102. Falsifying and falsely applying trade marks.—(1) A person shall be deemed to falsify a trade mark who, either,— (a) without the assent of the proprietor of the trade mark makes that trade mark or a deceptively similar mark; or (b) falsifies any genuine trade mark, whether by alteration, addition, effacement or otherwise.
(2) A person shall be deemed to falsely apply to goods or services a trade mark who, without the assent of the proprietor of the trade mark,— (a) applies such trade mark or a deceptively similar mark to goods or services or any package containing goods;
(b) uses any package bearing a mark which is identical with or deceptively similar to the trade mark of such proprietor, for the purpose of packing, filling or wrapping therein any goods other than the genuine goods of the proprietor of the trade mark.
(3) Any trade mark falsified as mentioned in sub-section (1) or falsely applied as mentioned in sub-section (2), is in this Act referred to as a false trade mark.
(4) In any prosecution for falsifying a trade mark or falsely applying a trade mark to goods or services, the burden of proving the assent of the proprietor shall lie on the accused.

103. Penalty for applying false trade marks, trade descriptions, etc.—Any person who— (a) falsifies any trade mark; or (b) falsely applies to goods or services any trade mark; or (c) makes, disposes of, or has in his possession, any die, block, machine, plate or other instrument for the purpose of falsifying or of being used for falsifying, a trade mark; or (d) applies any false trade description to goods or services; or (e) applies to any goods to which an indication of the country or place in which they were made or produced or the name and address of the manufacturer or person for whom the goods are manufactured is required to be applied under section 139, a false indication of such country, place, name or address; or (f) tampers with, alters or effaces an indication of origin which has been applied to any goods to which it is required to be applied under section 139; or (g) causes any of the things above mentioned in this section to be done, shall, unless he proves that he acted, without intent to defraud, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees:
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than six months or a fine of less than fifty thousand rupees.
104. Penalty for selling goods or providing services to which false trade mark or false trade description is applied.—Any person who sells, lets for hire or exposes for sale, or hires or has in his possession for sale, goods or things, or provides or hires services, to which any false trade mark or false trade description is applied or which, being required under section 139 to have applied to them an indication of the country or place in which they were made or produced or the name and address of the manufacturer, or person for whom the goods are manufactured or services provided, as the case may be, are without the indications so required, shall, unless he proves,— (a) that, having taken all reasonable precautions against committing an offence against this section, he had at the time of commission of the alleged offence no reason to suspect the genuineness of the trade mark or trade description or that any offence had been committed in respect of the goods or services; or (b) that, on demand by or on behalf of the prosecutor, he gave all the information in his power with respect to the person from whom he obtained such goods or things or services; or (c) that otherwise he had acted innocently, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees:
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than six months or a fine of less than fifty thousand rupees.
105. Enhanced penalty on second or subsequent conviction.—Whoever having already been convicted of an offence under section 103 or section 104 is again convicted of any such offence shall be punishable for the second and for every subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees:
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reason to be mentioned in the judgement, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than one year or a fine of less than one lakh rupees:
Provided further that for the purposes of this section, no cognizance shall be taken of any conviction made before the commencement of this Act.

106. Penalty for removing piece goods, etc., contrary to section 81.—If any person removes or attempts to remove or causes or attempts to cause to be removed for sale from any premises referred to in section 81 or sells or exposes for sale or has in his possession for sale or for any purpose of trade or manufacture piece goods or cotton yarn or cotton thread which is not marked as required by that section, every such piece and every such bundle of yarn and all such thread and everything used for the packing thereof shall be forfeited to Government and such person shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.
107. Penalty for falsely representing a trade mark as registered.—(1) No person shall make any representation— (a) with respect to a mark, not being a registered trade mark, to the effect that it is a registered trade mark; or (b) with respect to a part of a registered trade mark, not being a part separately registered as a trade mark, to the effect that it is separately registered as a trade mark; or (c) to the effect that a registered trade mark is registered in respect of any goods or services in respect of which it is not in fact registered; or (d) to the effect that registration of a trade mark gives an exclusive right to the use thereof in any circumstances in which, having regard to limitation entered on the register, the registration does not in fact give that right.
(2) If any person contravenes any of the provisions of sub-section (1), he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) For the purposes of this section, the use in India in relation to a trade mark of the word ―registered‖, or of any other expression, symbol or sign referring whether expressly or impliedly to registration, shall be deemed to import a reference to registration in the register, except— (a) where that word or other expression, symbol or sign is used in direct association with other words delineated in characters at least as large as those in which that word or other expression, symbol or sign is delineated and indicating that the reference is to registration as a trade mark under the law of a country outside India being a country under the law of which the registration referred to is in fact in force; or (b) where that other expression, symbol or sign is of itself such as to indicate that the reference is to such registration as is mentioned in clause (a); or (c) where that word is used in relation to a mark registered as a trade mark under the law of a country outside India and in relation solely to goods to be exported to that country or in relation to services for use in that country.
108. Penalty for improperly describing a place of business as connected with the Trade Marks Office.—If any person uses on his place of business, or on any document issued by him, or otherwise, words which would reasonably lead to the belief that his place of business is, or is officially connected with, the Trade Marks Office, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
109. Penalty for falsification of entries in the register.—If any person makes, or causes to be made, a false entry in the register, or a writing falsely purporting to be a copy of an entry in the register, or produces or tenders or causes to be produced or tendered, in evidence any such writing, knowing the entry or writing to be false, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
110. No offence in certain cases.—The provisions of sections 102, 103, 104 and 105 shall, in relation to a registered trade mark or proprietor of such mark, be subject to the rights created or recognised by this Act and no act or omission shall be deemed to be an offence under the aforesaid sections if,— (a) the alleged offence relates to a registered trade mark and the act or omission is permitted under this Act; and

(b) the alleged offence relates to a registered or an unregistered trade mark and the act or omission is permitted under any other law for the time being in force.
111. Forfeiture of goods.—(1) Where a person is convicted of an offence under section 103 or section 104 or section 105 or is acquitted of an offence under section 103 or section 104 on proof that he acted without intent to defraud, or under section 104 on proof of the matters specified in clause (a), clause (b) or clause (c) of that section, the court convicting or acquitting him may direct the forfeiture to Government of all goods and things by means of, or in relation to, which the offence has been committed, or but for such proof as aforesaid would have been committed.
(2) When a forfeiture is directed on a conviction and an appeal lies against the conviction, an appeal shall lie against the forfeiture also.
(3) When a forfeiture is directed on acquittal and the goods or things to which the direction relates are of value exceeding fifty rupees, an appeal against the forfeiture may be preferred, within thirty days from the date of the direction, to the court to which in appealable cases appeals lie from sentences of the court which directed the forfeiture.
(4) When a forfeiture is directed on a conviction, the court, before whom the person is convicted, may order any forfeited articles to be destroyed or otherwise disposed of as the court thinks fit.
112. Exemption of certain persons employed in ordinary course of business.—Where a person accused of an offence under section 103 proves— (a) that in the ordinary course of his business he is employed on behalf of other persons to apply trade marks or trade descriptions, or as the case may be, to make dies, blocks, machines, plates, or other instruments for making, or being used in making, trade marks; and (b) that in the case which is the subject of the charge he was so employed, and was not interested in the goods or other thing by way of profit or commission dependent on the sale of such goods or providing of services, as the case may be; and (c) that, having taken all reasonable precautions against committing the offence charged, he had, at the time of the commission of the alleged offence, no reason to suspect the genuineness of the trade mark or trade description; and (d) that, on demand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor, he gave all the information in his power with respect to the persons on whose behalf the trade mark or trade description was applied, he shall be acquitted.
113. Procedure where invalidity of registration is pleaded by the accused.—(1) Where the offence charged under section 103 or section 104 or section 105 is in relation to a registered trade mark and the accused pleads that the registration of the trade mark is invalid, the following procedure shall be followed:— (a) If the court is satisfied that such defence is prima facie tenable, it shall not proceed with the charge but shall adjourn the proceeding for three months from the date on which the plea of the accused is recorded to enable the accused to file an application before the Appellate Board under this Act, for the rectification of the register on the ground that the registration is invalid.
(b) If the accused proves to the court that he has made such application within the time so limited or within such further time as the court may for sufficient cause allow, the further proceedings in the prosecution shall stand stayed till the disposal of such application for rectification.
(c) If within a period of three months or within such extended time as may be allowed by the court the accused fails to apply to the Appellate Board for rectification of the register, the court shall proceed with the case as if the registration were valid.
(2) Where before the institution of a complaint of an offence referred to in sub-section (1), any application for the rectification of the register concerning the trade mark in question on the ground of invalidity of the registration thereof has already been properly made to and is pending before the tribunal, the court shall stay the further proceedings in the prosecution pending the disposal of the application aforesaid and shall determine the charge against the accused in conformity with the result of the application for rectification in so far as the complainant relies upon the registration of his mark.

114. Offences by companies.—(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, the company as well as every person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of its business at the time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section— (a) ―company‖ means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals;
and (b) ―director‖, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
115. Cognizance of certain offences and the powers of police officer for search and seizure.—(1) No court shall take cognizance of an offence under section 107 or section 108 or section 109 except on complaint in writing made by the Registrar or any officer authorised by him in writing:
Provided that in relation to clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 107, a court shall take cognizance of an offence on the basis of a certificate issued by the Registrar to the effect that a registered trade mark has been represented as registered in respect of any goods or services in respect of which it is not in fact registered.
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try an offence under this Act.
(3) The offences under section 103 or section 104 or section 105 shall be cognizable.
(4) Any police officer not below the rank of deputy superintendent of police or equivalent, may, if he is satisfied that any of the offences referred to in sub-section (3) has been, is being, or is likely to be, committed, search and seize without warrant the goods, die, block, machine, plate, other instruments or things involved in committing the offence, wherever found, and all the articles so seized shall, as soon as practicable, be produced before a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be:
Provided that the police officer, before making any search and seizure, shall obtain the opinion of the Registrar on facts involved in the offence relating to trade mark and shall abide by the opinion so obtained.
(5) Any person having an interest in any article seized under sub-section (4), may, within fifteen days of such seizure, make an application to the Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be, for such article being restored to him and the Magistrate, after hearing the applicant and the prosecution, shall make such order on the application as he may deem fit.
116. Evidence of origin of goods imported by sea.—In the case of goods brought into India by sea, evidence of the port of shipment shall, in a prosecution for an offence under this Act or under clause (b) of section 112 of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) relating to confiscation of goods under clause (d) of section 111 and notified by the Central Government under clause (n) of sub-section (2) of section 11 of the said Act for the protection of trade marks relating to import of goods, be prima facie evidence of the place or country in which the goods were made or produced.
117. Costs of defence or prosecution.—In any prosecution under this Act, the court may order such costs to be paid by the accused to the complainant, or by the complainant to the accused, as the court deems reasonable having regard to all the circumstances of the case and the conduct of the parties and the costs so awarded shall be recoverable as if they were a fine.

118. Limitation of prosecution.—No prosecution for an offence under this Act or under clause (b) of section 112 of the Customs Act,1962 (52 of 1962), relating to confiscation of goods under clause (d) of section 111 and notified by the Central Government under clause (n) of sub-section (2) of section 11 of the said Act for the protection of trade marks, relating to import of goods shall be commenced after expiration of three years next after the commission of the offence charged, or two years after the discovery thereof by the prosecutor, whichever expiration first-happens.
119. Information as to commission of offence.—An officer of the Government whose duty it is to take part in the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter shall not be compelled in any court to say whence he got any information as to the commission of any offence against this Act.
120. Punishment of abetment in India of acts done out of India.—If any person, being within India, abets the commission, without India, of any act which, if committed in India, would, under this Act, be an offence, he may be tried for such abetment in any place in India in which he may be found, and be punished therefor with the punishment to which he would be liable if he had himself committed in that place the act which he abetted.
121. Instructions of Central Government as to permissible variation to be observed by criminal courts.—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, issue instructions for the limits of variation, as regards number, quantity, measure, gauge or weight which are to be recognised by criminal courts as permissible in the case of any goods.
CHAPTER XIII
MISCELLANEOUS
122. Protection of action taken in good faith.—No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against any person in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.
123. Certain persons to be public servants.—Every person appointed under this Act and every Member of the Appellate Board shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
124. Stay of proceedings where the validity of registration of the trade mark is questioned, etc.—(1) Where in any suit for infringement of a trade mark— (a) the defendant pleads that registration of the plaintiff’s trade mark is invalid; or (b) the defendant raises a defence under clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 30 and the plaintiff pleads the invalidity of registration of the defendant’s trade mark, the court trying the suit (hereinafter referred to as the court), shall,— (i) if any proceedings for rectification of the register in relation to the plaintiff’s or defendant’s trade mark are pending before the Registrar or the Appellate Board, stay the suit pending the final disposal of such proceedings;
(ii) if no such proceedings are pending and the court is satisfied that the plea regarding the invalidity of the registration of the plaintiff’s or defendant’s trade mark is prima facie tenable, raise an issue regarding the same and adjourn the case for a period of three months from the date of the framing of the issue in order to enable the party concerned to apply to the Appellate Board for rectification of the register.
(2) If the party concerned proves to the court that he has made any such application as is referred to in clause (b) (ii) of sub-section (1) within the time specified therein or within such extended time as the court may for sufficient cause allow, the trial of the suit shall stand stayed until the final disposal of the rectification proceedings.
(3) If no such application as aforesaid has been made within the time so specified or within such extended time as the court may allow, the issue as to the validity of the registration of the trade mark concerned shall be deemed to have been abandoned and the court shall proceed with the suit in regard to the other issues in the case.

(4) The final order made in any rectification proceedings referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be binding upon the parties and the court shall dispose of the suit conformably to such order in so far as it relates to the issue as to the validity of the registration of the trade mark.
(5) The stay of a suit for the infringement of a trade mark under this section shall not preclude the court from making any interlocutory order (including any order granting an injunction, directing account to be kept, appointing a receiver or attaching any property), during the period of the stay of the suit.
125. Application for rectification of register to be made to Appellate Board in certain cases.—(1) Where in a suit for infringement of a registered trade mark the validity of the registration of the plaintiff’s trade mark is questioned by the defendant or where in any such suit the defendant raises a defence under clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 30 and the plaintiff questions the validity of the registration of the defendant’s trade mark, the issue as to the validity of the registration of the trade mark concerned shall be determined only on an application for the rectification of the register and, notwithstanding anything contained in section 47 or section 57, such application shall be made to the Appellate Board and not the Registrar.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), where an application for rectification of the register is made to the Registrar under section 47 or section 57, the Registrar may, if he thinks fit, refer the application at any stage of the proceedings to the Appellate Board.
126. Implied warranty on sale of marked goods.—Where a mark or a trade mark or trade description has been applied to the goods on sale or in the contract for sale of any goods or in relation to any service, the seller shall be deemed to warrant that the mark is a genuine mark and not falsely applied, or that the trade description is not a false trade description within the meaning of this Act unless the contrary is expressed in writing signed by or on behalf of the seller and delivered at the time of the sale of goods or providing of services on contract to and accepted by the buyer.
127. Powers of Registrar.—In all proceedings under this Act before the Registrar,— (a) the Registrar shall have all the powers of a civil court for the purposes of receiving evidence, administering oaths, enforcing the attendance of witnesses, compelling the discovery and production of documents and issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses;
(b) the Registrar may, subject to any rules made in this behalf under section 157, make such orders as to costs as he considers reasonable, and any such order shall be executable as a decree of a civil court:
Provided that the Registrar shall have no power to award costs to or against any party on an appeal to him against a refusal of the proprietor of a certification trade mark to certify goods or provision of services or to authorise the use of the mark;
(c) the Registrar may, on an application made in the prescribed manner, review his own decision.
128. Exercise of discretionary power by Registrar.—Subject to the provisions of section 131, the Registrar shall not exercise any discretionary or other power vested to him by this Act or the rules made thereunder adversely to a person applying for the exercise of that power without (if so required by that person within the prescribed time) giving to the person an opportunity of being heard.
129. Evidence before Registrar.—In any proceeding under this Act before the Registrar, evidence shall be given by affidavit:
Provided that the Registrar may, if he thinks fit, take oral evidence in lieu of, or in addition to, such evidence by affidavit.
130. Death of party to a proceeding.—If a person who is a party to a proceeding under this Act (not being a proceeding before the Appellate Board or a court) dies pending the proceeding, the Registrar may, on request, and on proof to his satisfaction of the transmission of the interest of the deceased person, substitute in the proceeding his successor in interest in his place, or, if the Registrar is of opinion that the interest of the deceased person is sufficiently represented by the surviving parties, permit the proceeding to continue without the substitution of his successor in interest.

131. Extension of time.—(1) If the Registrar is satisfied, on application made to him in the prescribed manner and accompanied by the prescribed fee, that there is sufficient cause for extending the time for doing any act (not being a time expressly provided in this Act), whether the time so specified has expired or not, he may, subject to such conditions as he may think fit to impose, extend the time and inform the parties accordingly.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to require the Registrar to hear the parties before disposing of an application for extension of time, and no appeal shall lie from any order of the Registrar under this section.
132. Abandonment.—Where, in the opinion of the Registrar, an applicant is in default in the prosecution of an application filed under this Act or any Act relating to trade marks in force prior to the commencement of this Act, the Registrar may, by notice require the applicant to remedy the default within a time specified and after giving him, if so, desired, an opportunity of being heard, treat the application as abandoned, unless the default is remedied within the time specified in the notice.
133. Preliminary advice by the Registrar as to distinctiveness.—(1) The Registrar may, on application made to him in the prescribed manner by any person who proposes to apply for the registration of a trade mark, give advice as to whether the trade mark appears to him prima facie to be distinctive.
(2) If, on an application for the registration of a trade mark as to which the Registrar has given advice as aforesaid in the affirmative made within three months after the advice was given, the Registrar, after further investigation or consideration, gives notice, to the applicant of objection on the ground that the trade mark is not distinctive, the applicant shall be entitled, on giving notice of withdrawal of the application within the prescribed period, to have repaid to him any fee paid on the filing of the application.
134. Suit for infringement, etc., to be instituted before District Court.—(1) No suit— (a) for the infringement of a registered trade mark; or (b) relating to any right in a registered trade mark; or (c) for passing off arising out of the use by the defendant of any trade mark which is identical with or deceptively similar to the plaintiff’s trade mark, whether registered or unregistered, shall be instituted in any court inferior to a District Court having jurisdiction to try the suit.
(2) For the purpose of clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1), a ―District Court having jurisdiction‖ shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) or any other law for the time being in force, include a District Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction, at the time of the institution of the suit or other proceeding, the person instituting the suit or proceeding, or, where there are more than one such persons any of them, actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain.
Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-section (2), ―person‖ includes the registered proprietor and the registered user.
135. Relief in suits for infringement or for passing off.—(1) The relief which a court may grant in any suit for infringement or for passing off referred to in section 134 includes injunction (subject to such terms, if any, as the court thinks fit) and at the option of the plaintiff, either damages or an account of profits, together with or without any order for the delivery-up of the infringing labels and marks for destruction or erasure.
(2) The order of injunction under sub-section (1) may include an ex parte injunction or any interlocutory order for any of the following matters, namely:— (a) for discovery of documents;
(b) preserving of infringing goods, documents or other evidence which are related to the subject-matter of the suit;

(c) restraining the defendant from disposing of or dealing with his assets in a manner which may adversely affect plaintiff’s ability to recover damages, costs or other pecuniary remedies which may be finally awarded to the plaintiff.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the court shall not grant relief by way of damages (other than nominal damages) or on account of profits in any case— (a) where in a suit for infringement of a trade mark, the infringement complained of is in relation to a certification trade mark or collective mark; or (b) where in a suit for infringement the defendant satisfies the court— (i) that at the time he commenced to use the trade mark complained of in the suit, he was unaware and had no reasonable ground for believing that the trade mark of the plaintiff was on the register or that the plaintiff was a registered user using by way of permitted use; and (ii) that when he became aware of the existence and nature of the plaintiff’s right in the trade mark, he forthwith ceased to use the trade mark in relation to goods or services in respect of which it was registered; or (c) where in a suit for passing off, the defendant satisfies the court— (i) that at the time he commenced to use the trade mark complained of in the suit, he was unaware and had no reasonable ground for believing that the trade mark for the plaintiff was in use; and (ii) that when he became aware of the existence and nature of the plaintiff’s trade mark he forthwith ceased to use the trade mark complained of.
136. Registered user to be impleaded in certain proceedings.—(1) In every proceeding under chapter VII or under section 91, every registered user of a trade mark using by way of permitted use, who is not himself an applicant in respect of any proceeding under that Chapter or section, shall be made a party to the proceeding.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, a registered user so made a party to the proceeding shall not be liable for any costs unless he enters an appearance and takes part in the proceeding.
137. Evidence of entries in register, etc., and things done by the Registrar.—(1) A copy of any entry in the register or of any document referred to in sub-section (1) of section 148 purporting to be certified by the Registrar and sealed with the seal of the Trade Marks Registry shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and in all proceedings without further proof or production of the original.
(2) A certificate purporting to be under the hand of the Registrar as to any entry, matter or thing that he is authorised by this Act or the rules to make or do shall be prima facie evidence of the entry having been made, and of the contents thereof, or of the matter or things having been done or not done.
138. Registrar and other officers not compellable to produce register, etc.—The Registrar or any officer of the Trade Marks Registry shall not, in any legal proceedings to which he is not a party, be compellable to produce the register or any other document in his custody, the contents of which can be proved by the production of a certified copy issued under this Act or to appear as a witness to prove the matters therein recorded unless by order of the court made for special cause.
139. Power to require goods to show indication of origin.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, require that goods of any class specified in the notification which are made or produced beyond the limits of India and imported into India, or, which are made or produced within the limits of India, shall, from such date as may be appointed by the notification not being less than three months from its issue, have applied to them an indication of the country or place in which they were made or produced, or of the name and address of the manufacturer or the person for whom the goods were manufactured.
(2) The notification may specify the manner in which such indication shall be applied that is to say, whether to goods themselves or in any other manner, and the times or occasions on which the presence of

the indication shall be necessary, that is to say, whether on importation only, or also at the time of sale, whether by wholesale or retail or both.
(3) No notification under this section shall be issued, unless application is made for its issue by persons or associations substantially representing the interests of dealers in, or manufacturers, producers, or users of, the goods concerned, or unless the Central Government is otherwise convinced that it is necessary in the public interest to issue the notification, with or without such inquiry, as the Central Government may consider necessary.
(4) The provisions of section 23 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) shall apply to the issue of a notification under this section as they apply to the making of a rule or bye-law the making of which is subject to the condition of previous publication.
(5) A notification under this section shall not apply to goods made or produced beyond the limits of India and imported into India, if in respect of those goods, the Commissioner of Customs is satisfied at the time of importation that they are intended for exportation whether after transshipment in or transit through India or otherwise.
140. Power to require information of imported goods bearing false trade marks.—(1) The proprietor or a licensee of a registered trade mark may give notice in writing to the Collector of Customs to prohibit the importation of any goods if the import of the said goods constitute infringement under clause (c) of sub-section (6) of section 29.
(2) Where goods, which are prohibited to be imported into India by notification of the Central Government under clause (n) of sub-section (2) of section 11 of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962), for the protection of trade marks, and are liable to confiscation on importation under that Act, are imported into India, the Commissioner of Customs if, upon representation made to him, he has reason to believe that the trade mark complained of is used as a false trade mark, may require the importer of the goods, or his agent, to produce any documents in his possession relating to the goods and to furnish information as to the name and address of the person by whom the goods were consigned to India and the name and address of the person to whom the goods were sent in India.
(3) The importer or his agent shall, within fourteen days, comply with the requirement as aforesaid, and if he fails to do so, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.
(4) Any information obtained from the importer of the goods or his agent under this section may be communicated by the Commissioner of Customs to the registered proprietor or registered user of the trade mark which is alleged to have been used as a false trade mark.
141. Certificate of validity.—If in any legal proceeding for rectification of the register before the Appellate Board a decision is on contest given in favour of the registered proprietor of the trade mark on the issue as to the validity of the registration of the trade mark, the Appellate Board may grant a certificate to that effect, and if such a certificate is granted, then, in any subsequent legal proceeding in which the said validity comes into question the said proprietor on obtaining a final order or judgment in his favour affirming validity of the registration of the trade mark shall, unless the said final order or judgment for sufficient reason directs otherwise, be entitled to his full cost charges and expenses as between legal practitioner and client.
142. Groundless threats of legal proceedings.—(1) Where a person, by means of circulars, advertisements or otherwise, threatens a person with an action or proceeding for infringement of a trade mark which is registered, or alleged by the first-mentioned person to be registered, or with some other like proceeding, a person aggrieved may, whether the person making the threats is or is not the registered proprietor or the registered user of the trade mark, bring a suit against the first-mentioned person and may obtain a declaration to the effect that the threats are unjustifiable, and an injunction against the continuance of the threats and may recover such damages (if any) as he has sustained, unless the first-mentioned person satisfies the court that the trade mark is registered and that the acts in respect of which the proceedings were threatened, constitute, or, if done, would constitute, an infringement of the trade mark.

(2) The last preceding sub-section does not apply if the registered proprietor of the trade mark, or a registered user acting in pursuance of sub-section (1) of section 52 with due diligence commences and prosecutes an action against the person threatened for infringement of the trade mark.
(3) Nothing in this section shall render a legal practitioner or a registered trade marks agent liable to an action under this section in respect of an act done by him in his professional capacity on behalf of a client.
(4) A suit under sub-section (1) shall not be instituted in any court inferior to a District Court.
143. Address for service.—An address for service stated in an application or notice of opposition shall for the purposes of the application or notice of opposition be deemed to be the address of the applicant or opponent, as the case may be, and all documents in relation to the application or notice of opposition may be served by leaving them at or sending them by post to the address for service of the applicant or opponent, as the case may be.
144. Trade usages, etc., to be taken into consideration.—In any proceeding relating to a trade mark, the tribunal shall admit evidence of the usages of the trade concerned and of any relevant trade mark or trade name or get up legitimately used by other persons.
145. Agents.—Where, by or under this Act, any act, other than the making of an affidavit, is required to be done before the Registrar by any person, the act may, subject to the rules made in this behalf, be done instead of by that person himself, by a person duly authorised in the prescribed manner, who is— (a) a legal practitioner, or (b) a person registered in the prescribed manner as a trade marks agent, or (c) a person in the sole and regular employment of the principal.
146. Marks registered by an agent or representative without authority.—If an agent or a representative of the proprietor of a registered trade mark, without authority uses or attempts to register or registers the mark in his own name, the proprietor shall be entitled to oppose the registration applied for or secure its cancellation or rectification of the register so as to bring him as the registered proprietor of the said mark by assignment in his favour:
Provided that such action shall be taken within three years of the registered proprietor of the trade mark becoming aware of the conduct of the agent or representative.
147. Indexes.—There shall be kept under the direction and supervision of the Registrar— (a) an index of registered trade marks;
(b) an index of trade marks in respect of which applications for registration are pending;
(c) an index of the names of the proprietors of registered trade marks; and (d) an index of the names of registered users.
148. Documents open to public inspection.—(1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (4) of section 49,— (a) the register and any document upon which any entry in the register is based;
(b) every notice of opposition to the registration of a trade mark application for rectification before the Registrar, counter-statement thereto, and any affidavit or document filed by the parties in any proceedings before the Registrar;
(c) all regulations deposited under section 63 or section 74, and all applications under section 66 or section 77 for varying such regulations;
(d) the indexes mentioned in section 147; and (e) such other documents as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify,

shall, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, be open to public inspection at the Trade Marks Registry:
Provided that when such register is maintained wholly or partly on computer, the inspection of such register under this section shall be made by inspecting the computer printout of the relevant entry in the register so maintained on computer.
(2) Any person may, on an application to the Registrar and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed, obtain a certified copy of any entry in the register or any document referred to in sub-section (1).
149. Reports of Registrar to be placed before Parliament.—The Central Government shall cause to be placed before both Houses of Parliament once a year a report respecting the execution by or under the Registrar of this Act.
150. Fees and surcharge.—(1) There shall be paid in respect of 1[applications, international applications] and registration and other matters under this Act such fees and surcharge as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(2) Where a fee is payable in respect of the doing of an act by the Registrar, the Registrar shall not do that act until the fee has been paid.
(3) Where a fee is payable in respect of the filing of a document at the Trade Marks Registry, the document shall be deemed not to have been filed at the Registry until the fee has been paid.
151. Savings in respect of certain matters in Chapter XII.—Nothing in Chapter XII shall— (a) exempt any person from any suit or other proceeding which might, but for anything in that Chapter, be brought against him; or (b) entitle any person to refuse to make a complete discovery, or to answer any question or interrogatory in any suit or other proceeding, but such discovery or answer shall not be admissible in evidence against such person in any such prosecution for an offence under that Chapter or against clause (h) of section 112 of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) relating to confiscation of goods under clause (d) of section 111 of that Act and notified by the Central Government under clause (n) of sub-section (2) of section 11 thereof for the protection of trade marks relating to import of goods; or (c) be construed so as to render liable to any prosecution or punishment any servant of a master resident in India who in good faith acts in obedience to the instructions of such master, and, on demand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor, has given full information as to his master and as to the instructions which he has received from his master.
152. Declaration as to ownership of trade mark not registrable under the Registration Act, 1908.—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), no document declaring or purporting to declare the ownership or title of a person to a trade mark other than a registered trade mark shall be registered under that Act.
153. Government to be bound.—The provisions of this Act shall be binding on the Government.
154. Special provisions relating to applications for registration from citizens of convention countries.—(1) With a view to the fulfilment of a treaty, convention or arrangement with any country or country which is a member of a group of countries or union of countries or Inter-Governmental Organisation outside India which affords to citizens of India similar privileges as granted to its own citizens, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare such country or group of countries or union of countries or Inter-Governmental Organisation to be a convention country or group of countries or union of countries or Inter-Governmental Organisation, as the case may be, for the purposes of this Act.
(2) Where a person has made an application for the registration of a trade mark in a convention country or country which is a member of a group of countries or union of countries or Inter-Governmental Organisation and that person, or his legal representative or assignee, makes an application for the

1. Subs. by Act 40 of 2010, s. 8, for ―applications‖ (w.e.f. 8-7-2013).

registration of the trade mark in India within six months after the date on which the application was made in the convention country or country which is a member of a group of countries or union of countries or Inter-Governmental Organisations, the trade mark shall, if registered under this Act, be registered as of the date on which the application was made in the convention country or country which is a member of a group of countries or union of countries or Inter-Governmental Organisation and that date shall be deemed for the purposes of this Act to be the date of registration.
(3) Where applications have been made for the registration of a trade mark in two or more convention countries or country which are members of group of countries or union of countries or Inter-Governmental Organisation, the period of six months referred to in the last preceding sub-section shall be reckoned from the date on which the earlier or earliest of those applications was made.
(4) Nothing in this Act shall entitle the proprietor of a trade mark to recover damages for infringement which took place prior to the date of application for registration under this Act.
155. Provision as to reciprocity.—Where any country or country which is a member of a group of countries or union of countries or Inter-Governmental Organisation specified by the Central Government in this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette does not accord to citizens of India the same rights in respect of the registration and protection of trade marks as it accords to its own nationals, no national of such country or country which is a member of a group of countries or union of countries or InterGovernmental Organisation, as the case may be, shall be entitled, either solely or jointly with any other person,— (a) to apply for the registration of, or be registered as the proprietor of, a trade mark;
(b) to be registered as the assignee of the proprietor of a registered trade mark; or (c) to apply for registration or be registered as a registered user of a trade mark under section 49.
156. Power of Central Government to remove difficulties.—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of five years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
157. Power to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette and subject to the conditions of previous publication, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— (i) the matters to be included in the Register of Trade Marks under sub-section (1) of section 6, and the safeguards to be observed in the maintenance of records on computer floppies or diskettes or in any other electronic form under sub-section (2) of that section;
(ii) the manner of publication of alphabetical index of classification of goods and services under sub-section (1) of section 8;
(iii) the manner in which the Registrar may notify a word as an international non-proprietary name under section 13;
(iv) the manner of making an application for dissolution of an association under sub-section (5) of section 16;
(v) the manner of making an application for registration of a trade mark under sub-section (1) of section 18;
(vi) the manner of advertising of an application for registration under sub-section (1), and the manner of notifying corrections or amendments under sub-section (2), of section 20;

1[(vii) the manner of giving a notice of opposition and the fee payable for such notice under sub-section (1) and sending counter-statement under sub-section (2) and submission of evidence and the time therefor under sub-section (4) of section 21;] (viii) the form of certificate of registration under sub-section (2), and the manner of giving notice to the applicant under sub-section (3) of section 23;
(ix) the forms of application for renewal and restoration the time within which such application is to be made and fee and surcharge if any payable with each application, under section 25 and the time within which the Registrar shall send a notice and the manner of such notice under sub-section (3) of that section;
2[(ixa) the time within which the international application is to be forwarded to the International Bureau and the manner of certifying the particulars by the Registrar under sub-section (4) of section 36D;
(ixb) the manner of keeping a record of particulars of an international registration under sub-section (1) of section 36E;
(ixc) the manner of informing the International Bureau under sub-section (2) of section 36E;
(ixd) the manner of advertising the international registration and the time within which the international registration shall be advertised under sub-section (3) of section 39E;] (x) the manner of submitting statement of cases under sub-section (2) of section 40;
(xi) the manner of making an application by the proprietor of a trade mark under section 41;
(xii) the manner of making an application for assignment or transmission of a certification trade mark under section 43;
(xiii) the manner of making an application to the Registrar to register title under sub-section (1) of section 45;
2[(xiiia) the period within which the Registrar shall dispose of an application under sub-section (3) of section 45;] (xiv) the manner in which and the period within which an application is to be made under sub-section (4) of section 46;
(xv) the manner of making an application under sub-section (2) of section 47;
(xvi) the manner of making an application, documents and other evidence to accompany such application under sub-section (1) and the manner in which notice is to be issued under sub-section (3) of section 49;
(xvii) the manner of making an application under sub-section (1), the manner of issuing a notice under sub-section (2) and the procedure for cancelling a registration under sub-section (3) of section 50;
(xviii) the manner of making applications under sub-sections (1) and (2), the manner of giving notice under sub-section (4) and the manner of service of notice of rectification under sub-section (5) of section 57;
(xix) the manner of making an application under section 58;
(xx) the manner of making an application under sub-section (1), the manner of advertising an application, time and manner of notice by which application may be opposed under sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 59;
(xxi) the manner of advertisement under sub-section (2) of section 60;
(xxii) the other matters to be specified in the regulations under sub-section (2) of section 63;
(xxiii) the manner of making an application under sub-section (1) of section 71;

1. Subs. by Act 40 of 2010, s. 9, for clause (vii) (w.e.f. 8-7-2013).

(xxiv) the manner of advertising an application under section 73;
(xxv) the manner of making an application under section 77;
1*

*

*

*

* (xxix) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 2[Chairperson], 3[Vice-Chairperson] and other Members under sub-section (1) of section 88;
(xxx) the procedure for investigation of misbehavior or incapacity of the 1[Chairperson], 2[Vice-Chairperson] and other Members under sub-section (3) of section 89;
(xxxi) the salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the Appellate Board under sub-section (2), and the manner in which the officers and other employees of the Appellate Board shall discharge their functions under sub-section (3) of section 90;
(xxxii) the form of making an appeal, the manner of verification and the fee payable under sub-section (3) of section 91;
(xxxiii) the form in which and the particulars to be included in the application to the Appellate Board under sub-section (1) of section 97;
(xxxiv) the manner of making an application for review under clause (c) of section 127;
(xxxv) the time within which an application is to be made to the Registrar for exercising his discretionary power under section 128;
(xxxvi) the manner of making an application and the fee payable therefor under sub-section (1) of section 131;
(xxxvii) the manner of making an application under sub-section (1) and the period for withdrawal of such application under sub-section (2) of section 133;
(xxxviii) the manner of authorising any person to act and the manner of registration as a trade mark agent under section 145;
(xxxix) the conditions for inspection of documents under sub-section (1) and the fee payable for obtaining a certified copy of any entry in the register under sub-section (2) of section 148;
(xl) the fees and surcharge payable for making applications and registration and other matters under section 150;
(xli) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.
(3) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall include the power to give retrospective effect in respect of the matters referred to in clauses (xxix) and (xxxi) of sub-section (2) from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, but no retrospective effect shall be given to any such rule so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom sub-rule may be applicable.
(4) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
158. Amendments.—The enactment specified in the Schedule shall be amended in the manner specified therein.

1. Cls. (xxvi), (xxvii) and (xxviii) omitted by Act 40 of 2010, s. 9 (w.e.f. 8-7-2013).

159. Repeal and savings.—(1) The Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958) is hereby repealed.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1987), with respect to repeals, any notification, rule, order, requirement, registration, certificate, notice, decision, determination, direction, approval, authorisation, consent, application, request or thing made, issued, given or done under the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958) shall, if in force at the commencement of this Act, continue to be in force and have effect as if made, issued, given or done under the corresponding provisions of this Act.
(3) The provisions of this Act shall apply to any application for registration of a trade mark pending at the commencement of this Act and to any proceedings consequent thereon and to any registration granted in pursuance thereof.
(4) Subject to the provisions of section 100 and notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act, any legal proceeding pending in any court at the commencement of this Act may be continued in that court as if this Act had not been passed.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where a particular use of a registered trade mark is not an infringement of a trade mark registered before the commencement of this Act, then, the continued use of that mark shall not be an infringement under this Act.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the date of expiration of registration of a trade mark registered before the commencement of this Act shall be the date immediately after the period of seven years for which it was registered or renewed:
Provided that the registration of a defensive trade mark referred to in section 47 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958) shall cease to have effect on the date immediately after the expiry of five years of such commencement or after the expiry of the period for which it was registered or renewed, whichever is earlier.

THE SCHEDULE (See section 158)
AMENDMENTS

Year Act No.
Short title Amendment

The Companies Act, 1956 (1) In Section 20, for sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:— ―(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, a name which is identical with, or too nearly resembles,— (i) the name by which a company in existence has been previously registered, or (ii) a registered trade mark, or a trade mark which is subject of an application for registration, of any other person under the Trade Marks Act, 1999, may be deemed to be undesirable by the Central Government within the meaning of sub-section (1).
(3) The Central Government may, before deeming a name as undesirable under clause (ii) of sub-section (2), consult the Registrar of Trade Marks.‖.
(II) In section 22, in sub-section (1),— (i) for the portion beginning with ―if, through‖ and ending with ―the first-mentioned company–‖ the following shall be substituted, namely:— ―If, through inadvertence or otherwise, a company on its first registration or on its registration by a new name, is registered by a name which,— (i) in the opinion of the Central Government, is identical with, or too nearly resembles, the name by which a company in existence has been previously registered, whether under this Act or any previous companies law, the first mentioned company, or (ii) on an application by a registered proprietor of a trade mark, is in the opinion of the Central Government identical with, or too nearly resembles, a registered trade mark of such proprietor under the Trade Marks Act, 1999, such company,—‖;
(ii) the following proviso shall be added, namely:— ―Provided that no application under clause (ii) made by a registered proprietor of a trade mark after five years of coming to notice of registration of the company shall be considered by the Central Government.‖.


================================================================================
SOURCE: TRIPS Agreement — 2017 Amended Version (Official WTO).pdf
================================================================================

ANNEX 1C

AGREEMENT ON TRADE-RELATED ASPECTS OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS AS AMENDED BY THE 2005 PROTOCOL AMENDING THE TRIPS AGREEMENTa

PART I
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND BASIC PRINCIPLES

PART II STANDARDS CONCERNING THE AVAILABILITY, SCOPE AND USE OF INTELLECTUAL
PROPERTY RIGHTS

1.
Copyright and Related Rights

2.
Trademarks

3.
Geographical Indications

4.
Industrial Designs

5.
Patents

6.
Layout-Designs (Topographies) of Integrated Circuits

7.
Protection of Undisclosed Information

8.
Control of Anti-Competitive Practices in Contractual Licences

PART III
ENFORCEMENT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

1.
General Obligations

2.
Civil and Administrative Procedures and Remedies

3.
Provisional Measures

4.
Special Requirements Related to Border Measures

5.
Criminal Procedures

PART IV ACQUISITION AND MAINTENANCE OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS AND RELATED INTER-PARTES PROCEDURES

PART V DISPUTE PREVENTION AND SETTLEMENT

PART VI
TRANSITIONAL ARRANGEMENTS

PART VII INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS; FINAL PROVISIONS

ANNEX AND APPENDIX TO THE TRIPS AGREEMENT

AGREEMENT ON TRADE-RELATED ASPECTS OF
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

Members,

Desiring to reduce distortions and impediments to international trade, and taking into account the need to promote effective and adequate protection of intellectual property rights, and to ensure that measures and procedures to enforce intellectual property rights do not themselves become barriers to legitimate trade;

Recognizing, to this end, the need for new rules and disciplines concerning:

a Editorial note: The TRIPS Agreement was amended through the Protocol Amending the TRIPS Agreement, done at Geneva on 6 December 2005, which entered into force on 23 January 2017. The amendment inserted a new Article 31bis into the TRIPS Agreement as well as an Annex and Appendix. The amended TRIPS Agreement is only binding on the Members that have accepted it. In respect of each Member that accepts the Protocol after its entry into force, it will take effect for that member upon acceptance, in accordance with Article X:3 of the WTO Agreement. This file reproduces the amended version.

(a) the applicability of the basic principles of GATT 1994 and of relevant international intellectual property agreements or conventions;

(b) the provision of adequate standards and principles concerning the availability, scope and use of trade-related intellectual property rights;

(c) the provision of effective and appropriate means for the enforcement of traderelated intellectual property rights, taking into account differences in national legal systems;

(d) the provision of effective and expeditious procedures for the multilateral prevention and settlement of disputes between governments; and

(e) transitional arrangements aiming at the fullest participation in the results of the negotiations;

Recognizing the need for a multilateral framework of principles, rules and disciplines dealing with international trade in counterfeit goods;

Recognizing that intellectual property rights are private rights;

Recognizing the underlying public policy objectives of national systems for the protection of intellectual property, including developmental and technological objectives;

Recognizing also the special needs of the least-developed country Members in respect of maximum flexibility in the domestic implementation of laws and regulations in order to enable them to create a sound and viable technological base;

Emphasizing the importance of reducing tensions by reaching strengthened commitments to resolve disputes on trade-related intellectual property issues through multilateral procedures;

Desiring to establish a mutually supportive relationship between the WTO and the World Intellectual Property Organization (referred to in this Agreement as "WIPO") as well as other relevant international organizations;

Hereby agree as follows:

PART I

GENERAL PROVISIONS AND BASIC PRINCIPLES

Nature and Scope of Obligations

1.
Members shall give effect to the provisions of this Agreement. Members may, but shall not be obliged to, implement in their law more extensive protection than is required by this Agreement, provided that such protection does not contravene the provisions of this Agreement. Members shall be free to determine the appropriate method of implementing the provisions of this Agreement within their own legal system and practice.

2.
For the purposes of this Agreement, the term "intellectual property" refers to all categories of intellectual property that are the subject of Sections 1 through 7 of Part II.

3.
Members shall accord the treatment provided for in this Agreement to the nationals of other Members.2 In respect of the relevant intellectual property right, the nationals of other Members shall be understood as those natural or legal persons that would meet the criteria for eligibility for

2 When "nationals" are referred to in this Agreement, they shall be deemed, in the case of a separate customs territory Member of the WTO, to mean persons, natural or legal, who are domiciled or who have a real and effective industrial or commercial establishment in that customs territory.

protection provided for in the Paris Convention (1967), the Berne Convention (1971), the Rome Convention and the Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits, were all Members of the WTO members of those conventions.3 Any Member availing itself of the possibilities provided in paragraph 3 of Article 5 or paragraph 2 of Article 6 of the Rome Convention shall make a notification as foreseen in those provisions to the Council for Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (the "Council for TRIPS").

Intellectual Property Conventionsa

1.
In respect of Parts II, III and IV of this Agreement, Members shall comply with Articles 1 through 12, and Article 19, of the Paris Convention (1967).

2.
Nothing in Parts I to IV of this Agreement shall derogate from existing obligations that Members may have to each other under the Paris Convention, the Berne Convention, the Rome Convention and the Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits.

National Treatment

1.
Each Member shall accord to the nationals of other Members treatment no less favourable than that it accords to its own nationals with regard to the protection5 of intellectual property, subject to the exceptions already provided in, respectively, the Paris Convention (1967), the Berne Convention (1971), the Rome Convention or the Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits. In respect of performers, producers of phonograms and broadcasting organizations, this obligation only applies in respect of the rights provided under this Agreement.
Any Member availing itself of the possibilities provided in Article 6 of the Berne Convention (1971) or paragraph 1(b) of Article 16 of the Rome Convention shall make a notification as foreseen in those provisions to the Council for TRIPS.

2.
Members may avail themselves of the exceptions permitted under paragraph 1 in relation to judicial and administrative procedures, including the designation of an address for service or the appointment of an agent within the jurisdiction of a Member, only where such exceptions are necessary to secure compliance with laws and regulations which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement and where such practices are not applied in a manner which would constitute a disguised restriction on trade.

Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment

With regard to the protection of intellectual property, any advantage, favour, privilege or immunity granted by a Member to the nationals of any other country shall be accorded immediately and unconditionally to the nationals of all other Members. Exempted from this obligation are any advantage, favour, privilege or immunity accorded by a Member:

3 In this Agreement, "Paris Convention" refers to the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property; "Paris Convention (1967)" refers to the Stockholm Act of this Convention of 14 July 1967. "Berne Convention" refers to the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works; "Berne Convention (1971)" refers to the Paris Act of this Convention of 24 July 1971. "Rome Convention" refers to the International Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organizations, adopted at Rome on 26 October 1961. "Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits" (IPIC Treaty) refers to the Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits, adopted at Washington on 26 May 1989. "WTO Agreement" refers to the Agreement Establishing the WTO.
a Editorial note: The relevant text of these conventions is not reproduced in this publication.
5 For the purposes of Articles 3 and 4, "protection" shall include matters affecting the availability, acquisition, scope, maintenance and enforcement of intellectual property rights as well as those matters affecting the use of intellectual property rights specifically addressed in this Agreement.

(a) deriving from international agreements on judicial assistance or law enforcement of a general nature and not particularly confined to the protection of intellectual property;

(b) granted in accordance with the provisions of the Berne Convention (1971) or the Rome Convention authorizing that the treatment accorded be a function not of national treatment but of the treatment accorded in another country;

(c) in respect of the rights of performers, producers of phonograms and broadcasting organizations not provided under this Agreement;

(d) deriving from international agreements related to the protection of intellectual property which entered into force prior to the entry into force of the WTO Agreement, provided that such agreements are notified to the Council for TRIPS and do not constitute an arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination against nationals of other Members.

Multilateral Agreements on Acquisition or Maintenance of Protection

The obligations under Articles 3 and 4 do not apply to procedures provided in multilateral agreements concluded under the auspices of WIPO relating to the acquisition or maintenance of intellectual property rights.

Exhaustion

For the purposes of dispute settlement under this Agreement, subject to the provisions of Articles 3 and 4 nothing in this Agreement shall be used to address the issue of the exhaustion of intellectual property rights.

Objectives

The protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights should contribute to the promotion of technological innovation and to the transfer and dissemination of technology, to the mutual advantage of producers and users of technological knowledge and in a manner conducive to social and economic welfare, and to a balance of rights and obligations.

Principles

1.
Members may, in formulating or amending their laws and regulations, adopt measures necessary to protect public health and nutrition, and to promote the public interest in sectors of vital importance to their socio-economic and technological development, provided that such measures are consistent with the provisions of this Agreement.

2.
Appropriate measures, provided that they are consistent with the provisions of this Agreement, may be needed to prevent the abuse of intellectual property rights by right holders or the resort to practices which unreasonably restrain trade or adversely affect the international transfer of technology.

PART II

STANDARDS CONCERNING THE AVAILABILITY, SCOPE
AND USE OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

SECTION 1: COPYRIGHT AND RELATED RIGHTS

Relation to the Berne Convention

1.
Members shall comply with Articles 1 through 21 of the Berne Convention (1971) and the Appendix thereto. However, Members shall not have rights or obligations under this Agreement in respect of the rights conferred under Article 6bis of that Convention or of the rights derived therefrom.

2.
Copyright protection shall extend to expressions and not to ideas, procedures, methods of operation or mathematical concepts as such.

Computer Programs and Compilations of Data

1.
Computer programs, whether in source or object code, shall be protected as literary works under the Berne Convention (1971).

2.
Compilations of data or other material, whether in machine readable or other form, which by reason of the selection or arrangement of their contents constitute intellectual creations shall be protected as such. Such protection, which shall not extend to the data or material itself, shall be without prejudice to any copyright subsisting in the data or material itself.

Rental Rights

In respect of at least computer programs and cinematographic works, a Member shall provide authors and their successors in title the right to authorize or to prohibit the commercial rental to the public of originals or copies of their copyright works. A Member shall be excepted from this obligation in respect of cinematographic works unless such rental has led to widespread copying of such works which is materially impairing the exclusive right of reproduction conferred in that Member on authors and their successors in title. In respect of computer programs, this obligation does not apply to rentals where the program itself is not the essential object of the rental.

Term of Protection

Whenever the term of protection of a work, other than a photographic work or a work of applied art, is calculated on a basis other than the life of a natural person, such term shall be no less than 50 years from the end of the calendar year of authorized publication, or, failing such authorized publication within 50 years from the making of the work, 50 years from the end of the calendar year of making.

Limitations and Exceptions

Members shall confine limitations or exceptions to exclusive rights to certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal exploitation of the work and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the right holder.

Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms (Sound Recordings) and Broadcasting Organizations

1.
In respect of a fixation of their performance on a phonogram, performers shall have the possibility of preventing the following acts when undertaken without their authorization: the fixation of their unfixed performance and the reproduction of such fixation. Performers shall also have the possibility of preventing the following acts when undertaken without their authorization: the broadcasting by wireless means and the communication to the public of their live performance.

2.
Producers of phonograms shall enjoy the right to authorize or prohibit the direct or indirect reproduction of their phonograms.

3.
Broadcasting organizations shall have the right to prohibit the following acts when undertaken without their authorization: the fixation, the reproduction of fixations, and the rebroadcasting by wireless means of broadcasts, as well as the communication to the public of television broadcasts of the same. Where Members do not grant such rights to broadcasting organizations, they shall provide owners of copyright in the subject matter of broadcasts with the possibility of preventing the above acts, subject to the provisions of the Berne Convention (1971).

4.
The provisions of Article 11 in respect of computer programs shall apply mutatis mutandis to producers of phonograms and any other right holders in phonograms as determined in a Member's law. If on 15 April 1994 a Member has in force a system of equitable remuneration of right holders in respect of the rental of phonograms, it may maintain such system provided that the commercial rental of phonograms is not giving rise to the material impairment of the exclusive rights of reproduction of right holders.

5.
The term of the protection available under this Agreement to performers and producers of phonograms shall last at least until the end of a period of 50 years computed from the end of the calendar year in which the fixation was made or the performance took place. The term of protection granted pursuant to paragraph 3 shall last for at least 20 years from the end of the calendar year in which the broadcast took place.

6.
Any Member may, in relation to the rights conferred under paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, provide for conditions, limitations, exceptions and reservations to the extent permitted by the Rome Convention. However, the provisions of Article 18 of the Berne Convention (1971) shall also apply, mutatis mutandis, to the rights of performers and producers of phonograms in phonograms.

SECTION 2: TRADEMARKS

Protectable Subject Matter

1.
Any sign, or any combination of signs, capable of distinguishing the goods or services of one undertaking from those of other undertakings, shall be capable of constituting a trademark. Such signs, in particular words including personal names, letters, numerals, figurative elements and combinations of colours as well as any combination of such signs, shall be eligible for registration as trademarks. Where signs are not inherently capable of distinguishing the relevant goods or services, Members may make registrability depend on distinctiveness acquired through use. Members may require, as a condition of registration, that signs be visually perceptible.

2.
Paragraph 1 shall not be understood to prevent a Member from denying registration of a trademark on other grounds, provided that they do not derogate from the provisions of the Paris Convention (1967).

3.
Members may make registrability depend on use. However, actual use of a trademark shall not be a condition for filing an application for registration. An application shall not be refused solely on the ground that intended use has not taken place before the expiry of a period of three years from the date of application.

4.
The nature of the goods or services to which a trademark is to be applied shall in no case form an obstacle to registration of the trademark.

5.
Members shall publish each trademark either before it is registered or promptly after it is registered and shall afford a reasonable opportunity for petitions to cancel the registration. In addition, Members may afford an opportunity for the registration of a trademark to be opposed.

Rights Conferred

1.
The owner of a registered trademark shall have the exclusive right to prevent all third parties not having the owner’s consent from using in the course of trade identical or similar signs for goods or services which are identical or similar to those in respect of which the trademark is registered where such use would result in a likelihood of confusion. In case of the use of an identical sign for identical goods or services, a likelihood of confusion shall be presumed. The rights described above shall not prejudice any existing prior rights, nor shall they affect the possibility of Members making rights available on the basis of use.

2.
Article 6bis of the Paris Convention (1967) shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to services. In determining whether a trademark is well-known, Members shall take account of the knowledge of the trademark in the relevant sector of the public, including knowledge in the Member concerned which has been obtained as a result of the promotion of the trademark.

3.
Article 6bis of the Paris Convention (1967) shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to goods or services which are not similar to those in respect of which a trademark is registered, provided that use of that trademark in relation to those goods or services would indicate a connection between those goods or services and the owner of the registered trademark and provided that the interests of the owner of the registered trademark are likely to be damaged by such use.

Exceptions

Members may provide limited exceptions to the rights conferred by a trademark, such as fair use of descriptive terms, provided that such exceptions take account of the legitimate interests of the owner of the trademark and of third parties.

Term of Protection

Initial registration, and each renewal of registration, of a trademark shall be for a term of no less than seven years. The registration of a trademark shall be renewable indefinitely.

Requirement of Use

1.
If use is required to maintain a registration, the registration may be cancelled only after an uninterrupted period of at least three years of non-use, unless valid reasons based on the existence of obstacles to such use are shown by the trademark owner. Circumstances arising independently

of the will of the owner of the trademark which constitute an obstacle to the use of the trademark, such as import restrictions on or other government requirements for goods or services protected by the trademark, shall be recognized as valid reasons for non-use.

2.
When subject to the control of its owner, use of a trademark by another person shall be recognized as use of the trademark for the purpose of maintaining the registration.

Other Requirements

The use of a trademark in the course of trade shall not be unjustifiably encumbered by special requirements, such as use with another trademark, use in a special form or use in a manner detrimental to its capability to distinguish the goods or services of one undertaking from those of other undertakings. This will not preclude a requirement prescribing the use of the trademark identifying the undertaking producing the goods or services along with, but without linking it to, the trademark distinguishing the specific goods or services in question of that undertaking.

Licensing and Assignment

Members may determine conditions on the licensing and assignment of trademarks, it being understood that the compulsory licensing of trademarks shall not be permitted and that the owner of a registered trademark shall have the right to assign the trademark with or without the transfer of the business to which the trademark belongs.

SECTION 3: GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS

Protection of Geographical Indications

1.
Geographical indications are, for the purposes of this Agreement, indications which identify a good as originating in the territory of a Member, or a region or locality in that territory, where a given quality, reputation or other characteristic of the good is essentially attributable to its geographical origin.

2.
In respect of geographical indications, Members shall provide the legal means for interested parties to prevent:

(a) the use of any means in the designation or presentation of a good that indicates or suggests that the good in question originates in a geographical area other than the true place of origin in a manner which misleads the public as to the geographical origin of the good;

(b) any use which constitutes an act of unfair competition within the meaning of Article 10bis of the Paris Convention (1967).

3.
A Member shall, ex officio if its legislation so permits or at the request of an interested party, refuse or invalidate the registration of a trademark which contains or consists of a geographical indication with respect to goods not originating in the territory indicated, if use of the indication in the trademark for such goods in that Member is of such a nature as to mislead the public as to the true place of origin.

4.
The protection under paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall be applicable against a geographical indication which, although literally true as to the territory, region or locality in which the goods originate, falsely represents to the public that the goods originate in another territory.

Additional Protection for Geographical Indications for Wines and Spirits

1.
Each Member shall provide the legal means for interested parties to prevent use of a geographical indication identifying wines for wines not originating in the place indicated by the geographical indication in question or identifying spirits for spirits not originating in the place indicated by the geographical indication in question, even where the true origin of the goods is indicated or the geographical indication is used in translation or accompanied by expressions such as "kind", "type", "style", "imitation" or the like.6

2.
The registration of a trademark for wines which contains or consists of a geographical indication identifying wines or for spirits which contains or consists of a geographical indication identifying spirits shall be refused or invalidated, ex officio if a Member's legislation so permits or at the request of an interested party, with respect to such wines or spirits not having this origin.

3.
In the case of homonymous geographical indications for wines, protection shall be accorded to each indication, subject to the provisions of paragraph 4 of Article 22. Each Member shall determine the practical conditions under which the homonymous indications in question will be differentiated from each other, taking into account the need to ensure equitable treatment of the producers concerned and that consumers are not misled.

4.
In order to facilitate the protection of geographical indications for wines, negotiations shall be undertaken in the Council for TRIPS concerning the establishment of a multilateral system of notification and registration of geographical indications for wines eligible for protection in those Members participating in the system.

International Negotiations; Exceptions

1.
Members agree to enter into negotiations aimed at increasing the protection of individual geographical indications under Article 23. The provisions of paragraphs 4 through 8 below shall not be used by a Member to refuse to conduct negotiations or to conclude bilateral or multilateral agreements. In the context of such negotiations, Members shall be willing to consider the continued applicability of these provisions to individual geographical indications whose use was the subject of such negotiations.

2.
The Council for TRIPS shall keep under review the application of the provisions of this Section; the first such review shall take place within two years of the entry into force of the WTO Agreement. Any matter affecting the compliance with the obligations under these provisions may be drawn to the attention of the Council, which, at the request of a Member, shall consult with any Member or Members in respect of such matter in respect of which it has not been possible to find a satisfactory solution through bilateral or plurilateral consultations between the Members concerned.
The Council shall take such action as may be agreed to facilitate the operation and further the objectives of this Section.

3.
In implementing this Section, a Member shall not diminish the protection of geographical indications that existed in that Member immediately prior to the date of entry into force of the WTO Agreement.

4.
Nothing in this Section shall require a Member to prevent continued and similar use of a particular geographical indication of another Member identifying wines or spirits in connection with goods or services by any of its nationals or domiciliaries who have used that geographical indication in a continuous manner with regard to the same or related goods or services in the territory of that Member either (a) for at least 10 years preceding 15 April 1994 or (b) in good faith preceding that date.

6 Notwithstanding the first sentence of Article 42, Members may, with respect to these obligations, instead provide for enforcement by administrative action.

5.
Where a trademark has been applied for or registered in good faith, or where rights to a trademark have been acquired through use in good faith either:

(a) before the date of application of these provisions in that Member as defined in Part VI; or

(b) before the geographical indication is protected in its country of origin;

measures adopted to implement this Section shall not prejudice eligibility for or the validity of the registration of a trademark, or the right to use a trademark, on the basis that such a trademark is identical with, or similar to, a geographical indication.

6.
Nothing in this Section shall require a Member to apply its provisions in respect of a geographical indication of any other Member with respect to goods or services for which the relevant indication is identical with the term customary in common language as the common name for such goods or services in the territory of that Member. Nothing in this Section shall require a Member to apply its provisions in respect of a geographical indication of any other Member with respect to products of the vine for which the relevant indication is identical with the customary name of a grape variety existing in the territory of that Member as of the date of entry into force of the WTO Agreement.

7.
A Member may provide that any request made under this Section in connection with the use or registration of a trademark must be presented within five years after the adverse use of the protected indication has become generally known in that Member or after the date of registration of the trademark in that Member provided that the trademark has been published by that date, if such date is earlier than the date on which the adverse use became generally known in that Member, provided that the geographical indication is not used or registered in bad faith.

8.
The provisions of this Section shall in no way prejudice the right of any person to use, in the course of trade, that person’s name or the name of that person’s predecessor in business, except where such name is used in such a manner as to mislead the public.

9.
There shall be no obligation under this Agreement to protect geographical indications which are not or cease to be protected in their country of origin, or which have fallen into disuse in that country.

SECTION 4: INDUSTRIAL DESIGNS

Requirements for Protection

1.
Members shall provide for the protection of independently created industrial designs that are new or original. Members may provide that designs are not new or original if they do not significantly differ from known designs or combinations of known design features. Members may provide that such protection shall not extend to designs dictated essentially by technical or functional considerations.

2.
Each Member shall ensure that requirements for securing protection for textile designs, in particular in regard to any cost, examination or publication, do not unreasonably impair the opportunity to seek and obtain such protection. Members shall be free to meet this obligation through industrial design law or through copyright law.

Protection

1.
The owner of a protected industrial design shall have the right to prevent third parties not having the owner’s consent from making, selling or importing articles bearing or embodying a design

which is a copy, or substantially a copy, of the protected design, when such acts are undertaken for commercial purposes.

2.
Members may provide limited exceptions to the protection of industrial designs, provided that such exceptions do not unreasonably conflict with the normal exploitation of protected industrial designs and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the owner of the protected design, taking account of the legitimate interests of third parties.

3.
The duration of protection available shall amount to at least 10 years.

SECTION 5: PATENTS

Patentable Subject Matter

1.
Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3, patents shall be available for any inventions, whether products or processes, in all fields of technology, provided that they are new, involve an inventive step and are capable of industrial application.7 Subject to paragraph 4 of Article 65, paragraph 8 of Article 70 and paragraph 3 of this Article, patents shall be available and patent rights enjoyable without discrimination as to the place of invention, the field of technology and whether products are imported or locally produced.

2.
Members may exclude from patentability inventions, the prevention within their territory of the commercial exploitation of which is necessary to protect ordre public or morality, including to protect human, animal or plant life or health or to avoid serious prejudice to the environment, provided that such exclusion is not made merely because the exploitation is prohibited by their law.

3.
Members may also exclude from patentability:

(a) diagnostic, therapeutic and surgical methods for the treatment of humans or animals;

(b) plants and animals other than micro-organisms, and essentially biological processes for the production of plants or animals other than non-biological and microbiological processes. However, Members shall provide for the protection of plant varieties either by patents or by an effective sui generis system or by any combination thereof. The provisions of this subparagraph shall be reviewed four years after the date of entry into force of the WTO Agreement.

Rights Conferred

1.
A patent shall confer on its owner the following exclusive rights:

(a) where the subject matter of a patent is a product, to prevent third parties not having the owner’s consent from the acts of: making, using, offering for sale, selling, or importing8 for these purposes that product;

(b) where the subject matter of a patent is a process, to prevent third parties not having the owner’s consent from the act of using the process, and from the acts of: using, offering for sale, selling, or importing for these purposes at least the product obtained directly by that process.

7 For the purposes of this Article, the terms "inventive step" and "capable of industrial application" may be deemed by a Member to be synonymous with the terms "non-obvious" and "useful" respectively.
8 This right, like all other rights conferred under this Agreement in respect of the use, sale, importation or other distribution of goods, is subject to the provisions of Article 6.

2.
Patent owners shall also have the right to assign, or transfer by succession, the patent and to conclude licensing contracts.

Conditions on Patent Applicants

1.
Members shall require that an applicant for a patent shall disclose the invention in a manner sufficiently clear and complete for the invention to be carried out by a person skilled in the art and may require the applicant to indicate the best mode for carrying out the invention known to the inventor at the filing date or, where priority is claimed, at the priority date of the application.

2.
Members may require an applicant for a patent to provide information concerning the applicant’s corresponding foreign applications and grants.

Exceptions to Rights Conferred

Members may provide limited exceptions to the exclusive rights conferred by a patent, provided that such exceptions do not unreasonably conflict with a normal exploitation of the patent and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the patent owner, taking account of the legitimate interests of third parties.

Other Use Without Authorization of the Right Holder

Where the law of a Member allows for other use9 of the subject matter of a patent without the authorization of the right holder, including use by the government or third parties authorized by the government, the following provisions shall be respected:

(a) authorization of such use shall be considered on its individual merits;

(b) such use may only be permitted if, prior to such use, the proposed user has made efforts to obtain authorization from the right holder on reasonable commercial terms and conditions and that such efforts have not been successful within a reasonable period of time. This requirement may be waived by a Member in the case of a national emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency or in cases of public non-commercial use. In situations of national emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency, the right holder shall, nevertheless, be notified as soon as reasonably practicable. In the case of public non-commercial use, where the government or contractor, without making a patent search, knows or has demonstrable grounds to know that a valid patent is or will be used by or for the government, the right holder shall be informed promptly;

(c) the scope and duration of such use shall be limited to the purpose for which it was authorized, and in the case of semi-conductor technology shall only be for public non-commercial use or to remedy a practice determined after judicial or administrative process to be anti-competitive;

(d) such use shall be non-exclusive;

(e) such use shall be non-assignable, except with that part of the enterprise or goodwill which enjoys such use;

(f) any such use shall be authorized predominantly for the supply of the domestic market of the Member authorizing such use;

9 "Other use" refers to use other than that allowed under Article 30.

(g) authorization for such use shall be liable, subject to adequate protection of the legitimate interests of the persons so authorized, to be terminated if and when the circumstances which led to it cease to exist and are unlikely to recur. The competent authority shall have the authority to review, upon motivated request, the continued existence of these circumstances;

(h) the right holder shall be paid adequate remuneration in the circumstances of each case, taking into account the economic value of the authorization;

(i) the legal validity of any decision relating to the authorization of such use shall be subject to judicial review or other independent review by a distinct higher authority in that Member;

(j) any decision relating to the remuneration provided in respect of such use shall be subject to judicial review or other independent review by a distinct higher authority in that Member;

(k) Members are not obliged to apply the conditions set forth in subparagraphs (b) and (f) where such use is permitted to remedy a practice determined after judicial or administrative process to be anti-competitive. The need to correct anticompetitive practices may be taken into account in determining the amount of remuneration in such cases. Competent authorities shall have the authority to refuse termination of authorization if and when the conditions which led to such authorization are likely to recur;

(l) where such use is authorized to permit the exploitation of a patent ("the second patent") which cannot be exploited without infringing another patent ("the first patent"), the following additional conditions shall apply:

(i) the invention claimed in the second patent shall involve an important technical advance of considerable economic significance in relation to the invention claimed in the first patent;

(ii) the owner of the first patent shall be entitled to a cross-licence on reasonable terms to use the invention claimed in the second patent; and

(iii) the use authorized in respect of the first patent shall be nonassignable except with the assignment of the second patent.

Article 31bis

1.
The obligations of an exporting Member under Article 31(f) shall not apply with respect to the grant by it of a compulsory licence to the extent necessary for the purposes of production of a pharmaceutical product(s) and its export to an eligible importing Member(s) in accordance with the terms set out in paragraph 2 of the Annex to this Agreement.

2.
Where a compulsory licence is granted by an exporting Member under the system set out in this Article and the Annex to this Agreement, adequate remuneration pursuant to Article 31(h) shall be paid in that Member taking into account the economic value to the importing Member of the use that has been authorized in the exporting Member. Where a compulsory licence is granted for the same products in the eligible importing Member, the obligation of that Member under Article 31(h) shall not apply in respect of those products for which remuneration in accordance with the first sentence of this paragraph is paid in the exporting Member.

3.
With a view to harnessing economies of scale for the purposes of enhancing purchasing power for, and facilitating the local production of, pharmaceutical products: where a developing or least-developed country WTO Member is a party to a regional trade agreement within the meaning of Article XXIV of the GATT 1994 and the Decision of 28 November 1979 on Differential and More Favourable Treatment Reciprocity and Fuller Participation of Developing Countries (L/4903), at least

half of the current membership of which is made up of countries presently on the United Nations list of least-developed countries, the obligation of that Member under Article 31(f) shall not apply to the extent necessary to enable a pharmaceutical product produced or imported under a compulsory licence in that Member to be exported to the markets of those other developing or least-developed country parties to the regional trade agreement that share the health problem in question. It is understood that this will not prejudice the territorial nature of the patent rights in question.

4.
Members shall not challenge any measures taken in conformity with the provisions of this Article and the Annex to this Agreement under subparagraphs 1(b) and 1(c) of Article XXIII of GATT 1994.

5.
This Article and the Annex to this Agreement are without prejudice to the rights, obligations and flexibilities that Members have under the provisions of this Agreement other than paragraphs (f) and (h) of Article 31, including those reaffirmed by the Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health (WT/MIN(01)/DEC/2), and to their interpretation. They are also without prejudice to the extent to which pharmaceutical products produced under a compulsory licence can be exported under the provisions of Article 31(f).

Revocation/Forfeiture

An opportunity for judicial review of any decision to revoke or forfeit a patent shall be available.

Term of Protection

The term of protection available shall not end before the expiration of a period of twenty years counted from the filing date.10

Process Patents: Burden of Proof

1.
For the purposes of civil proceedings in respect of the infringement of the rights of the owner referred to in paragraph 1(b) of Article 28, if the subject matter of a patent is a process for obtaining a product, the judicial authorities shall have the authority to order the defendant to prove that the process to obtain an identical product is different from the patented process. Therefore, Members shall provide, in at least one of the following circumstances, that any identical product when produced without the consent of the patent owner shall, in the absence of proof to the contrary, be deemed to have been obtained by the patented process:

(a) if the product obtained by the patented process is new;

(b) if there is a substantial likelihood that the identical product was made by the process and the owner of the patent has been unable through reasonable efforts to determine the process actually used.

2.
Any Member shall be free to provide that the burden of proof indicated in paragraph 1 shall be on the alleged infringer only if the condition referred to in subparagraph (a) is fulfilled or only if the condition referred to in subparagraph (b) is fulfilled.

3.
In the adduction of proof to the contrary, the legitimate interests of defendants in protecting their manufacturing and business secrets shall be taken into account.

10 It is understood that those Members which do not have a system of original grant may provide that the term of protection shall be computed from the filing date in the system of original grant.

SECTION 6: LAYOUT-DESIGNS (TOPOGRAPHIES) OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS

Relation to the IPIC Treaty

Members agree to provide protection to the layout-designs (topographies) of integrated circuits (referred to in this Agreement as "layout-designs") in accordance with Articles 2 through 7 (other than paragraph 3 of Article 6), Article 12 and paragraph 3 of Article 16 of the Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits and, in addition, to comply with the following provisions.

Scope of the Protection

Subject to the provisions of paragraph 1 of Article 37, Members shall consider unlawful the following acts if performed without the authorization of the right holder:11 importing, selling, or otherwise distributing for commercial purposes a protected layout-design, an integrated circuit in which a protected layout-design is incorporated, or an article incorporating such an integrated circuit only in so far as it continues to contain an unlawfully reproduced layout-design.

Acts Not Requiring the Authorization of the Right Holder

1.
Notwithstanding Article 36, no Member shall consider unlawful the performance of any of the acts referred to in that Article in respect of an integrated circuit incorporating an unlawfully reproduced layout-design or any article incorporating such an integrated circuit where the person performing or ordering such acts did not know and had no reasonable ground to know, when acquiring the integrated circuit or article incorporating such an integrated circuit, that it incorporated an unlawfully reproduced layout-design. Members shall provide that, after the time that such person has received sufficient notice that the layout-design was unlawfully reproduced, that person may perform any of the acts with respect to the stock on hand or ordered before such time, but shall be liable to pay to the right holder a sum equivalent to a reasonable royalty such as would be payable under a freely negotiated licence in respect of such a layout-design.

2.
The conditions set out in subparagraphs (a) through (k) of Article 31 shall apply mutatis mutandis in the event of any non-voluntary licensing of a layout-design or of its use by or for the government without the authorization of the right holder.

Term of Protection

1.
In Members requiring registration as a condition of protection, the term of protection of layout-designs shall not end before the expiration of a period of 10 years counted from the date of filing an application for registration or from the first commercial exploitation wherever in the world it occurs.

2.
In Members not requiring registration as a condition for protection, layout-designs shall be protected for a term of no less than 10 years from the date of the first commercial exploitation wherever in the world it occurs.

11 The term "right holder" in this Section shall be understood as having the same meaning as the term "holder of the right" in the IPIC Treaty.

3.
Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, a Member may provide that protection shall lapse 15 years after the creation of the layout-design.

SECTION 7: PROTECTION OF UNDISCLOSED INFORMATION

1.
In the course of ensuring effective protection against unfair competition as provided in Article 10bis of the Paris Convention (1967), Members shall protect undisclosed information in accordance with paragraph 2 and data submitted to governments or governmental agencies in accordance with paragraph 3.

2.
Natural and legal persons shall have the possibility of preventing information lawfully within their control from being disclosed to, acquired by, or used by others without their consent in a manner contrary to honest commercial practices12 so long as such information:

(a) is secret in the sense that it is not, as a body or in the precise configuration and assembly of its components, generally known among or readily accessible to persons within the circles that normally deal with the kind of information in question;

(b) has commercial value because it is secret; and

(c) has been subject to reasonable steps under the circumstances, by the person lawfully in control of the information, to keep it secret.

3.
Members, when requiring, as a condition of approving the marketing of pharmaceutical or of agricultural chemical products which utilize new chemical entities, the submission of undisclosed test or other data, the origination of which involves a considerable effort, shall protect such data against unfair commercial use. In addition, Members shall protect such data against disclosure, except where necessary to protect the public, or unless steps are taken to ensure that the data are protected against unfair commercial use.

SECTION 8: CONTROL OF ANTI-COMPETITIVE PRACTICES
IN CONTRACTUAL LICENCES

1.
Members agree that some licensing practices or conditions pertaining to intellectual property rights which restrain competition may have adverse effects on trade and may impede the transfer and dissemination of technology.

2.
Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent Members from specifying in their legislation licensing practices or conditions that may in particular cases constitute an abuse of intellectual property rights having an adverse effect on competition in the relevant market. As provided above, a Member may adopt, consistently with the other provisions of this Agreement, appropriate measures to prevent or control such practices, which may include for example exclusive grantback conditions, conditions preventing challenges to validity and coercive package licensing, in the light of the relevant laws and regulations of that Member.

3.
Each Member shall enter, upon request, into consultations with any other Member which has cause to believe that an intellectual property right owner that is a national or domiciliary of the Member to which the request for consultations has been addressed is undertaking practices in violation of the requesting Member's laws and regulations on the subject matter of this Section, and which wishes to secure compliance with such legislation, without prejudice to any action under the law and to the full freedom of an ultimate decision of either Member. The Member addressed shall

12 For the purpose of this provision, "a manner contrary to honest commercial practices" shall mean at least practices such as breach of contract, breach of confidence and inducement to breach, and includes the acquisition of undisclosed information by third parties who knew, or were grossly negligent in failing to know, that such practices were involved in the acquisition.

accord full and sympathetic consideration to, and shall afford adequate opportunity for, consultations with the requesting Member, and shall cooperate through supply of publicly available nonconfidential information of relevance to the matter in question and of other information available to the Member, subject to domestic law and to the conclusion of mutually satisfactory agreements concerning the safeguarding of its confidentiality by the requesting Member.

4.
A Member whose nationals or domiciliaries are subject to proceedings in another Member concerning alleged violation of that other Member's laws and regulations on the subject matter of this Section shall, upon request, be granted an opportunity for consultations by the other Member under the same conditions as those foreseen in paragraph 3.

PART III

ENFORCEMENT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

SECTION 1: GENERAL OBLIGATIONS

1.
Members shall ensure that enforcement procedures as specified in this Part are available under their law so as to permit effective action against any act of infringement of intellectual property rights covered by this Agreement, including expeditious remedies to prevent infringements and remedies which constitute a deterrent to further infringements. These procedures shall be applied in such a manner as to avoid the creation of barriers to legitimate trade and to provide for safeguards against their abuse.

2.
Procedures concerning the enforcement of intellectual property rights shall be fair and equitable. They shall not be unnecessarily complicated or costly, or entail unreasonable time-limits or unwarranted delays.

3.
Decisions on the merits of a case shall preferably be in writing and reasoned. They shall be made available at least to the parties to the proceeding without undue delay. Decisions on the merits of a case shall be based only on evidence in respect of which parties were offered the opportunity to be heard.

4.
Parties to a proceeding shall have an opportunity for review by a judicial authority of final administrative decisions and, subject to jurisdictional provisions in a Member's law concerning the importance of a case, of at least the legal aspects of initial judicial decisions on the merits of a case.
However, there shall be no obligation to provide an opportunity for review of acquittals in criminal cases.

5.
It is understood that this Part does not create any obligation to put in place a judicial system for the enforcement of intellectual property rights distinct from that for the enforcement of law in general, nor does it affect the capacity of Members to enforce their law in general. Nothing in this Part creates any obligation with respect to the distribution of resources as between enforcement of intellectual property rights and the enforcement of law in general.

SECTION 2: CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES AND REMEDIES

Fair and Equitable Procedures

Members shall make available to right holders13 civil judicial procedures concerning the enforcement of any intellectual property right covered by this Agreement. Defendants shall have

13 For the purpose of this Part, the term "right holder" includes federations and associations having legal standing to assert such rights.

the right to written notice which is timely and contains sufficient detail, including the basis of the claims. Parties shall be allowed to be represented by independent legal counsel, and procedures shall not impose overly burdensome requirements concerning mandatory personal appearances. All parties to such procedures shall be duly entitled to substantiate their claims and to present all relevant evidence. The procedure shall provide a means to identify and protect confidential information, unless this would be contrary to existing constitutional requirements.

Evidence

1.
The judicial authorities shall have the authority, where a party has presented reasonably available evidence sufficient to support its claims and has specified evidence relevant to substantiation of its claims which lies in the control of the opposing party, to order that this evidence be produced by the opposing party, subject in appropriate cases to conditions which ensure the protection of confidential information.

2.
In cases in which a party to a proceeding voluntarily and without good reason refuses access to, or otherwise does not provide necessary information within a reasonable period, or significantly impedes a procedure relating to an enforcement action, a Member may accord judicial authorities the authority to make preliminary and final determinations, affirmative or negative, on the basis of the information presented to them, including the complaint or the allegation presented by the party adversely affected by the denial of access to information, subject to providing the parties an opportunity to be heard on the allegations or evidence.

Injunctions

1.
The judicial authorities shall have the authority to order a party to desist from an infringement, inter alia to prevent the entry into the channels of commerce in their jurisdiction of imported goods that involve the infringement of an intellectual property right, immediately after customs clearance of such goods. Members are not obliged to accord such authority in respect of protected subject matter acquired or ordered by a person prior to knowing or having reasonable grounds to know that dealing in such subject matter would entail the infringement of an intellectual property right.

2.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Part and provided that the provisions of Part II specifically addressing use by governments, or by third parties authorized by a government, without the authorization of the right holder are complied with, Members may limit the remedies available against such use to payment of remuneration in accordance with subparagraph (h) of Article 31. In other cases, the remedies under this Part shall apply or, where these remedies are inconsistent with a Member's law, declaratory judgments and adequate compensation shall be available.

Damages

1.
The judicial authorities shall have the authority to order the infringer to pay the right holder damages adequate to compensate for the injury the right holder has suffered because of an infringement of that person’s intellectual property right by an infringer who knowingly, or with reasonable grounds to know, engaged in infringing activity.

2.
The judicial authorities shall also have the authority to order the infringer to pay the right holder expenses, which may include appropriate attorney's fees. In appropriate cases, Members may authorize the judicial authorities to order recovery of profits and/or payment of pre-established damages even where the infringer did not knowingly, or with reasonable grounds to know, engage in infringing activity.

Other Remedies

In order to create an effective deterrent to infringement, the judicial authorities shall have the authority to order that goods that they have found to be infringing be, without compensation of any sort, disposed of outside the channels of commerce in such a manner as to avoid any harm caused to the right holder, or, unless this would be contrary to existing constitutional requirements, destroyed. The judicial authorities shall also have the authority to order that materials and implements the predominant use of which has been in the creation of the infringing goods be, without compensation of any sort, disposed of outside the channels of commerce in such a manner as to minimize the risks of further infringements. In considering such requests, the need for proportionality between the seriousness of the infringement and the remedies ordered as well as the interests of third parties shall be taken into account. In regard to counterfeit trademark goods, the simple removal of the trademark unlawfully affixed shall not be sufficient, other than in exceptional cases, to permit release of the goods into the channels of commerce.

Right of Information

Members may provide that the judicial authorities shall have the authority, unless this would be out of proportion to the seriousness of the infringement, to order the infringer to inform the right holder of the identity of third persons involved in the production and distribution of the infringing goods or services and of their channels of distribution.

Indemnification of the Defendant

1.
The judicial authorities shall have the authority to order a party at whose request measures were taken and who has abused enforcement procedures to provide to a party wrongfully enjoined or restrained adequate compensation for the injury suffered because of such abuse. The judicial authorities shall also have the authority to order the applicant to pay the defendant expenses, which may include appropriate attorney's fees.

2.
In respect of the administration of any law pertaining to the protection or enforcement of intellectual property rights, Members shall only exempt both public authorities and officials from liability to appropriate remedial measures where actions are taken or intended in good faith in the course of the administration of that law.

Administrative Procedures

To the extent that any civil remedy can be ordered as a result of administrative procedures on the merits of a case, such procedures shall conform to principles equivalent in substance to those set forth in this Section.

SECTION 3: PROVISIONAL MEASURES

1.
The judicial authorities shall have the authority to order prompt and effective provisional measures:

(a) to prevent an infringement of any intellectual property right from occurring, and in particular to prevent the entry into the channels of commerce in their jurisdiction of goods, including imported goods immediately after customs clearance;

(b) to preserve relevant evidence in regard to the alleged infringement.

2.
The judicial authorities shall have the authority to adopt provisional measures inaudita altera parte where appropriate, in particular where any delay is likely to cause irreparable harm to the right holder, or where there is a demonstrable risk of evidence being destroyed.

3.
The judicial authorities shall have the authority to require the applicant to provide any reasonably available evidence in order to satisfy themselves with a sufficient degree of certainty that the applicant is the right holder and that the applicant’s right is being infringed or that such infringement is imminent, and to order the applicant to provide a security or equivalent assurance sufficient to protect the defendant and to prevent abuse.

4.
Where provisional measures have been adopted inaudita altera parte, the parties affected shall be given notice, without delay after the execution of the measures at the latest. A review, including a right to be heard, shall take place upon request of the defendant with a view to deciding, within a reasonable period after the notification of the measures, whether these measures shall be modified, revoked or confirmed.

5.
The applicant may be required to supply other information necessary for the identification of the goods concerned by the authority that will execute the provisional measures.

6.
Without prejudice to paragraph 4, provisional measures taken on the basis of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall, upon request by the defendant, be revoked or otherwise cease to have effect, if proceedings leading to a decision on the merits of the case are not initiated within a reasonable period, to be determined by the judicial authority ordering the measures where a Member's law so permits or, in the absence of such a determination, not to exceed 20 working days or 31 calendar days, whichever is the longer.

7.
Where the provisional measures are revoked or where they lapse due to any act or omission by the applicant, or where it is subsequently found that there has been no infringement or threat of infringement of an intellectual property right, the judicial authorities shall have the authority to order the applicant, upon request of the defendant, to provide the defendant appropriate compensation for any injury caused by these measures.

8.
To the extent that any provisional measure can be ordered as a result of administrative procedures, such procedures shall conform to principles equivalent in substance to those set forth in this Section.

SECTION 4: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS RELATED TO BORDER MEASURES14

Suspension of Release by Customs Authorities

Members shall, in conformity with the provisions set out below, adopt procedures15 to enable a right holder, who has valid grounds for suspecting that the importation of counterfeit trademark or pirated copyright goods16 may take place, to lodge an application in writing with competent

14 Where a Member has dismantled substantially all controls over movement of goods across its border with another Member with which it forms part of a customs union, it shall not be required to apply the provisions of this Section at that border.
15 It is understood that there shall be no obligation to apply such procedures to imports of goods put on the market in another country by or with the consent of the right holder, or to goods in transit.
16 For the purposes of this Agreement:
(a) "counterfeit trademark goods" shall mean any goods, including packaging, bearing without authorization a trademark which is identical to the trademark validly registered in respect of such goods, or which cannot be distinguished in its essential aspects from such a trademark, and which thereby infringes the rights of the owner of the trademark in question under the law of the country of importation;

authorities, administrative or judicial, for the suspension by the customs authorities of the release into free circulation of such goods. Members may enable such an application to be made in respect of goods which involve other infringements of intellectual property rights, provided that the requirements of this Section are met. Members may also provide for corresponding procedures concerning the suspension by the customs authorities of the release of infringing goods destined for exportation from their territories.

Application

Any right holder initiating the procedures under Article 51 shall be required to provide adequate evidence to satisfy the competent authorities that, under the laws of the country of importation, there is prima facie an infringement of the right holder’s intellectual property right and to supply a sufficiently detailed description of the goods to make them readily recognizable by the customs authorities. The competent authorities shall inform the applicant within a reasonable period whether they have accepted the application and, where determined by the competent authorities, the period for which the customs authorities will take action.

Security or Equivalent Assurance

1.
The competent authorities shall have the authority to require an applicant to provide a security or equivalent assurance sufficient to protect the defendant and the competent authorities and to prevent abuse. Such security or equivalent assurance shall not unreasonably deter recourse to these procedures.

2.
Where pursuant to an application under this Section the release of goods involving industrial designs, patents, layout-designs or undisclosed information into free circulation has been suspended by customs authorities on the basis of a decision other than by a judicial or other independent authority, and the period provided for in Article 55 has expired without the granting of provisional relief by the duly empowered authority, and provided that all other conditions for importation have been complied with, the owner, importer, or consignee of such goods shall be entitled to their release on the posting of a security in an amount sufficient to protect the right holder for any infringement.
Payment of such security shall not prejudice any other remedy available to the right holder, it being understood that the security shall be released if the right holder fails to pursue the right of action within a reasonable period of time.

Notice of Suspension

The importer and the applicant shall be promptly notified of the suspension of the release of goods according to Article 51.

Duration of Suspension

If, within a period not exceeding 10 working days after the applicant has been served notice of the suspension, the customs authorities have not been informed that proceedings leading to a decision on the merits of the case have been initiated by a party other than the defendant, or that the duly empowered authority has taken provisional measures prolonging the suspension of the release of the goods, the goods shall be released, provided that all other conditions for importation

(b) "pirated copyright goods" shall mean any goods which are copies made without the consent of the right holder or person duly authorized by the right holder in the country of production and which are made directly or indirectly from an article where the making of that copy would have constituted an infringement of a copyright or a related right under the law of the country of importation.

or exportation have been complied with; in appropriate cases, this time-limit may be extended by another 10 working days. If proceedings leading to a decision on the merits of the case have been initiated, a review, including a right to be heard, shall take place upon request of the defendant with a view to deciding, within a reasonable period, whether these measures shall be modified, revoked or confirmed. Notwithstanding the above, where the suspension of the release of goods is carried out or continued in accordance with a provisional judicial measure, the provisions of paragraph 6 of Article 50 shall apply.

Indemnification of the Importer and of the Owner of the Goods

Relevant authorities shall have the authority to order the applicant to pay the importer, the consignee and the owner of the goods appropriate compensation for any injury caused to them through the wrongful detention of goods or through the detention of goods released pursuant to Article 55.

Right of Inspection and Information

Without prejudice to the protection of confidential information, Members shall provide the competent authorities the authority to give the right holder sufficient opportunity to have any goods detained by the customs authorities inspected in order to substantiate the right holder’s claims. The competent authorities shall also have authority to give the importer an equivalent opportunity to have any such goods inspected. Where a positive determination has been made on the merits of a case, Members may provide the competent authorities the authority to inform the right holder of the names and addresses of the consignor, the importer and the consignee and of the quantity of the goods in question.

Ex Officio Action

Where Members require competent authorities to act upon their own initiative and to suspend the release of goods in respect of which they have acquired prima facie evidence that an intellectual property right is being infringed:

(a) the competent authorities may at any time seek from the right holder any information that may assist them to exercise these powers;

(b) the importer and the right holder shall be promptly notified of the suspension.
Where the importer has lodged an appeal against the suspension with the competent authorities, the suspension shall be subject to the conditions, mutatis mutandis, set out at Article 55;

(c) Members shall only exempt both public authorities and officials from liability to appropriate remedial measures where actions are taken or intended in good faith.

Remedies

Without prejudice to other rights of action open to the right holder and subject to the right of the defendant to seek review by a judicial authority, competent authorities shall have the authority to order the destruction or disposal of infringing goods in accordance with the principles set out in Article 46. In regard to counterfeit trademark goods, the authorities shall not allow the reexportation of the infringing goods in an unaltered state or subject them to a different customs procedure, other than in exceptional circumstances.

De Minimis Imports

Members may exclude from the application of the above provisions small quantities of goods of a non-commercial nature contained in travellers' personal luggage or sent in small consignments.

SECTION 5: CRIMINAL PROCEDURES

Members shall provide for criminal procedures and penalties to be applied at least in cases of wilful trademark counterfeiting or copyright piracy on a commercial scale. Remedies available shall include imprisonment and/or monetary fines sufficient to provide a deterrent, consistently with the level of penalties applied for crimes of a corresponding gravity. In appropriate cases, remedies available shall also include the seizure, forfeiture and destruction of the infringing goods and of any materials and implements the predominant use of which has been in the commission of the offence.
Members may provide for criminal procedures and penalties to be applied in other cases of infringement of intellectual property rights, in particular where they are committed wilfully and on a commercial scale.

PART IV

ACQUISITION AND MAINTENANCE OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS AND RELATED INTER-PARTES PROCEDURES

1.
Members may require, as a condition of the acquisition or maintenance of the intellectual property rights provided for under Sections 2 through 6 of Part II, compliance with reasonable procedures and formalities. Such procedures and formalities shall be consistent with the provisions of this Agreement.

2.
Where the acquisition of an intellectual property right is subject to the right being granted or registered, Members shall ensure that the procedures for grant or registration, subject to compliance with the substantive conditions for acquisition of the right, permit the granting or registration of the right within a reasonable period of time so as to avoid unwarranted curtailment of the period of protection.

3.
Article 4 of the Paris Convention (1967) shall apply mutatis mutandis to service marks.

4.
Procedures concerning the acquisition or maintenance of intellectual property rights and, where a Member's law provides for such procedures, administrative revocation and inter partes procedures such as opposition, revocation and cancellation, shall be governed by the general principles set out in paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 41.

5.
Final administrative decisions in any of the procedures referred to under paragraph 4 shall be subject to review by a judicial or quasi-judicial authority. However, there shall be no obligation to provide an opportunity for such review of decisions in cases of unsuccessful opposition or administrative revocation, provided that the grounds for such procedures can be the subject of invalidation procedures.

PART V

DISPUTE PREVENTION AND SETTLEMENT

Transparency

1.
Laws and regulations, and final judicial decisions and administrative rulings of general application, made effective by a Member pertaining to the subject matter of this Agreement (the availability, scope, acquisition, enforcement and prevention of the abuse of intellectual property rights) shall be published, or where such publication is not practicable made publicly available, in a national language, in such a manner as to enable governments and right holders to become acquainted with them. Agreements concerning the subject matter of this Agreement which are in force between the government or a governmental agency of a Member and the government or a governmental agency of another Member shall also be published.

2.
Members shall notify the laws and regulations referred to in paragraph 1 to the Council for TRIPS in order to assist that Council in its review of the operation of this Agreement. The Council shall attempt to minimize the burden on Members in carrying out this obligation and may decide to waive the obligation to notify such laws and regulations directly to the Council if consultations with WIPO on the establishment of a common register containing these laws and regulations are successful. The Council shall also consider in this connection any action required regarding notifications pursuant to the obligations under this Agreement stemming from the provisions of Article 6ter of the Paris Convention (1967).

3.
Each Member shall be prepared to supply, in response to a written request from another Member, information of the sort referred to in paragraph 1. A Member, having reason to believe that a specific judicial decision or administrative ruling or bilateral agreement in the area of intellectual property rights affects its rights under this Agreement, may also request in writing to be given access to or be informed in sufficient detail of such specific judicial decisions or administrative rulings or bilateral agreements.

4.
Nothing in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall require Members to disclose confidential information which would impede law enforcement or otherwise be contrary to the public interest or would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises, public or private.

Dispute Settlement

1.
The provisions of Articles XXII and XXIII of GATT 1994 as elaborated and applied by the Dispute Settlement Understanding shall apply to consultations and the settlement of disputes under this Agreement except as otherwise specifically provided herein.

2.
Subparagraphs 1(b) and 1(c) of Article XXIII of GATT 1994 shall not apply to the settlement of disputes under this Agreement for a period of five years from the date of entry into force of the WTO Agreement.

3.
During the time period referred to in paragraph 2, the Council for TRIPS shall examine the scope and modalities for complaints of the type provided for under subparagraphs 1(b) and 1(c) of Article XXIII of GATT 1994 made pursuant to this Agreement, and submit its recommendations to the Ministerial Conference for approval. Any decision of the Ministerial Conference to approve such recommendations or to extend the period in paragraph 2 shall be made only by consensus, and approved recommendations shall be effective for all Members without further formal acceptance process.

PART VI

TRANSITIONAL ARRANGEMENTS

Transitional Arrangements

1.
Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, no Member shall be obliged to apply the provisions of this Agreement before the expiry of a general period of one year following the date of entry into force of the WTO Agreement.

2.
A developing country Member is entitled to delay for a further period of four years the date of application, as defined in paragraph 1, of the provisions of this Agreement other than Articles 3, 4 and 5.

3.
Any other Member which is in the process of transformation from a centrally-planned into a market, free-enterprise economy and which is undertaking structural reform of its intellectual property system and facing special problems in the preparation and implementation of intellectual property laws and regulations, may also benefit from a period of delay as foreseen in paragraph 2.

4.
To the extent that a developing country Member is obliged by this Agreement to extend product patent protection to areas of technology not so protectable in its territory on the general date of application of this Agreement for that Member, as defined in paragraph 2, it may delay the application of the provisions on product patents of Section 5 of Part II to such areas of technology for an additional period of five years.

5.
A Member availing itself of a transitional period under paragraphs 1, 2, 3 or 4 shall ensure that any changes in its laws, regulations and practice made during that period do not result in a lesser degree of consistency with the provisions of this Agreement.

Least-Developed Country Members

1.
In view of the special needs and requirements of least-developed country Members, their economic, financial and administrative constraints, and their need for flexibility to create a viable technological base, such Members shall not be required to apply the provisions of this Agreement, other than Articles 3, 4 and 5, for a period of 10 years from the date of application as defined under paragraph 1 of Article 65. The Council for TRIPS shall, upon duly motivated request by a leastdeveloped country Member, accord extensions of this period.

2.
Developed country Members shall provide incentives to enterprises and institutions in their territories for the purpose of promoting and encouraging technology transfer to least-developed country Members in order to enable them to create a sound and viable technological base.

Technical Cooperation

In order to facilitate the implementation of this Agreement, developed country Members shall provide, on request and on mutually agreed terms and conditions, technical and financial cooperation in favour of developing and least-developed country Members. Such cooperation shall include assistance in the preparation of laws and regulations on the protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights as well as on the prevention of their abuse, and shall include support regarding the establishment or reinforcement of domestic offices and agencies relevant to these matters, including the training of personnel.

PART VII

INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS; FINAL PROVISIONS

Council for Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights

The Council for TRIPS shall monitor the operation of this Agreement and, in particular, Members' compliance with their obligations hereunder, and shall afford Members the opportunity of consulting on matters relating to the trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights. It shall carry out such other responsibilities as assigned to it by the Members, and it shall, in particular, provide any assistance requested by them in the context of dispute settlement procedures. In carrying out its functions, the Council for TRIPS may consult with and seek information from any source it deems appropriate. In consultation with WIPO, the Council shall seek to establish, within one year of its first meeting, appropriate arrangements for cooperation with bodies of that Organization.

International Cooperation

Members agree to cooperate with each other with a view to eliminating international trade in goods infringing intellectual property rights. For this purpose, they shall establish and notify contact points in their administrations and be ready to exchange information on trade in infringing goods. They shall, in particular, promote the exchange of information and cooperation between customs authorities with regard to trade in counterfeit trademark goods and pirated copyright goods.

Protection of Existing Subject Matter

1.
This Agreement does not give rise to obligations in respect of acts which occurred before the date of application of the Agreement for the Member in question.

2.
Except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement, this Agreement gives rise to obligations in respect of all subject matter existing at the date of application of this Agreement for the Member in question, and which is protected in that Member on the said date, or which meets or comes subsequently to meet the criteria for protection under the terms of this Agreement. In respect of this paragraph and paragraphs 3 and 4, copyright obligations with respect to existing works shall be solely determined under Article 18 of the Berne Convention (1971), and obligations with respect to the rights of producers of phonograms and performers in existing phonograms shall be determined solely under Article 18 of the Berne Convention (1971) as made applicable under paragraph 6 of Article 14 of this Agreement.

3.
There shall be no obligation to restore protection to subject matter which on the date of application of this Agreement for the Member in question has fallen into the public domain.

4.
In respect of any acts in respect of specific objects embodying protected subject matter which become infringing under the terms of legislation in conformity with this Agreement, and which were commenced, or in respect of which a significant investment was made, before the date of acceptance of the WTO Agreement by that Member, any Member may provide for a limitation of the remedies available to the right holder as to the continued performance of such acts after the date of application of this Agreement for that Member. In such cases the Member shall, however, at least provide for the payment of equitable remuneration.

5.
A Member is not obliged to apply the provisions of Article 11 and of paragraph 4 of Article 14 with respect to originals or copies purchased prior to the date of application of this Agreement for that Member.

6.
Members shall not be required to apply Article 31, or the requirement in paragraph 1 of Article 27 that patent rights shall be enjoyable without discrimination as to the field of technology,

to use without the authorization of the right holder where authorization for such use was granted by the government before the date this Agreement became known.

7.
In the case of intellectual property rights for which protection is conditional upon registration, applications for protection which are pending on the date of application of this Agreement for the Member in question shall be permitted to be amended to claim any enhanced protection provided under the provisions of this Agreement. Such amendments shall not include new matter.

8.
Where a Member does not make available as of the date of entry into force of the WTO Agreement patent protection for pharmaceutical and agricultural chemical products commensurate with its obligations under Article 27, that Member shall:

(a) notwithstanding the provisions of Part VI, provide as from the date of entry into force of the WTO Agreement a means by which applications for patents for such inventions can be filed;

(b) apply to these applications, as of the date of application of this Agreement, the criteria for patentability as laid down in this Agreement as if those criteria were being applied on the date of filing in that Member or, where priority is available and claimed, the priority date of the application; and

(c) provide patent protection in accordance with this Agreement as from the grant of the patent and for the remainder of the patent term, counted from the filing date in accordance with Article 33 of this Agreement, for those of these applications that meet the criteria for protection referred to in subparagraph (b).

9.
Where a product is the subject of a patent application in a Member in accordance with paragraph 8(a), exclusive marketing rights shall be granted, notwithstanding the provisions of Part VI, for a period of five years after obtaining marketing approval in that Member or until a product patent is granted or rejected in that Member, whichever period is shorter, provided that, subsequent to the entry into force of the WTO Agreement, a patent application has been filed and a patent granted for that product in another Member and marketing approval obtained in such other Member.

Review and Amendment

1.
The Council for TRIPS shall review the implementation of this Agreement after the expiration of the transitional period referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 65. The Council shall, having regard to the experience gained in its implementation, review it two years after that date, and at identical intervals thereafter. The Council may also undertake reviews in the light of any relevant new developments which might warrant modification or amendment of this Agreement.

2.
Amendments merely serving the purpose of adjusting to higher levels of protection of intellectual property rights achieved, and in force, in other multilateral agreements and accepted under those agreements by all Members of the WTO may be referred to the Ministerial Conference for action in accordance with paragraph 6 of Article X of the WTO Agreement on the basis of a consensus proposal from the Council for TRIPS.

Reservations

Reservations may not be entered in respect of any of the provisions of this Agreement without the consent of the other Members.

Security Exceptions

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:

(a) to require a Member to furnish any information the disclosure of which it considers contrary to its essential security interests; or

(b) to prevent a Member from taking any action which it considers necessary for the protection of its essential security interests;

(i) relating to fissionable materials or the materials from which they are derived;

(ii) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war and to such traffic in other goods and materials as is carried on directly or indirectly for the purpose of supplying a military establishment;

(iii) taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations; or

(c) to prevent a Member from taking any action in pursuance of its obligations under the United Nations Charter for the maintenance of international peace and security.

ANNEX TO THE TRIPS AGREEMENT

1.
For the purposes of Article 31bis and this Annex:
(a) "pharmaceutical product" means any patented product, or product manufactured through a patented process, of the pharmaceutical sector needed to address the public health problems as recognized in paragraph 1 of the Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health (WT/MIN(01)/DEC/2). It is understood that active ingredients necessary for its manufacture and diagnostic kits needed for its use would be included1;
(b) "eligible importing Member" means any least-developed country Member, and any other Member that has made a notification2 to the Council for TRIPS of its intention to use the system set out in Article 31bis and this Annex ("system") as an importer, it being understood that a Member may notify at any time that it will use the system in whole or in a limited way, for example only in the case of a national emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency or in cases of public non-commercial use.
It is noted that some Members will not use the system as importing Members3 and that some other Members have stated that, if they use the system, it would be in no more than situations of national emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency;
(c) "exporting Member" means a Member using the system to produce pharmaceutical products for, and export them to, an eligible importing Member.
2.
The terms referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 31bis are that:
(a) the eligible importing Member(s)4 has made a notification2 to the Council for TRIPS, that:
(i) specifies the names and expected quantities of the product(s) needed5;
(ii) confirms that the eligible importing Member in question, other than a least-developed country Member, has established that it has insufficient or no manufacturing capacities in the pharmaceutical sector for the product(s) in question in one of the ways set out in the Appendix to this Annex; and (iii) confirms that, where a pharmaceutical product is patented in its territory, it has granted or intends to grant a compulsory licence in accordance with Articles 31 and 31bis of this Agreement and the provisions of this Annex6;
(b) the compulsory licence issued by the exporting Member under the system shall contain the following conditions:
(i) only the amount necessary to meet the needs of the eligible importing Member(s) may be manufactured under the licence and the entirety of this

1 This subparagraph is without prejudice to subparagraph 1(b).
2 It is understood that this notification does not need to be approved by a WTO body in order to use the system.
3 Australia, Canada, the European Communities with, for the purposes of Article 31bis and this Annex, its member States, Iceland, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Switzerland, and the United States.
4 Joint notifications providing the information required under this subparagraph may be made by the regional organizations referred to in paragraph 3 of Article 31bis on behalf of eligible importing Members using the system that are parties to them, with the agreement of those parties.
5 The notification will be made available publicly by the WTO Secretariat through a page on the WTO website dedicated to the system.
6 This subparagraph is without prejudice to Article 66.1 of this Agreement.

production shall be exported to the Member(s) which has notified its needs to the Council for TRIPS;
(ii) products produced under the licence shall be clearly identified as being produced under the system through specific labelling or marking. Suppliers should distinguish such products through special packaging and/or special colouring/shaping of the products themselves, provided that such distinction is feasible and does not have a significant impact on price; and (iii) before shipment begins, the licensee shall post on a website7 the following information:
- the quantities being supplied to each destination as referred to in indent (i) above; and
- the distinguishing features of the product(s) referred to in indent (ii) above;
(c) the exporting Member shall notify8 the Council for TRIPS of the grant of the licence, including the conditions attached to it.9 The information provided shall include the name and address of the licensee, the product(s) for which the licence has been granted, the quantity(ies) for which it has been granted, the country(ies) to which the product(s) is (are) to be supplied and the duration of the licence. The notification shall also indicate the address of the website referred to in subparagraph (b)(iii) above.
3.
In order to ensure that the products imported under the system are used for the public health purposes underlying their importation, eligible importing Members shall take reasonable measures within their means, proportionate to their administrative capacities and to the risk of trade diversion to prevent re-exportation of the products that have actually been imported into their territories under the system. In the event that an eligible importing Member that is a developing country Member or a least-developed country Member experiences difficulty in implementing this provision, developed country Members shall provide, on request and on mutually agreed terms and conditions, technical and financial cooperation in order to facilitate its implementation.
4.
Members shall ensure the availability of effective legal means to prevent the importation into, and sale in, their territories of products produced under the system and diverted to their markets inconsistently with its provisions, using the means already required to be available under this Agreement. If any Member considers that such measures are proving insufficient for this purpose, the matter may be reviewed in the Council for TRIPS at the request of that Member.
5.
With a view to harnessing economies of scale for the purposes of enhancing purchasing power for, and facilitating the local production of, pharmaceutical products, it is recognized that the development of systems providing for the grant of regional patents to be applicable in the Members described in paragraph 3 of Article 31bis should be promoted. To this end, developed country Members undertake to provide technical cooperation in accordance with Article 67 of this Agreement, including in conjunction with other relevant intergovernmental organizations.
6.
Members recognize the desirability of promoting the transfer of technology and capacity building in the pharmaceutical sector in order to overcome the problem faced by Members with insufficient or no manufacturing capacities in the pharmaceutical sector. To this end, eligible importing Members and exporting Members are encouraged to use the system in a way which would promote this objective. Members undertake to cooperate in paying special attention to the transfer of technology and capacity building in the pharmaceutical sector in the work to be undertaken pursuant to Article 66.2 of this Agreement, paragraph 7 of the Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health and any other relevant work of the Council for TRIPS.

7 The licensee may use for this purpose its own website or, with the assistance of the WTO Secretariat, the page on the WTO website dedicated to the system.
8 It is understood that this notification does not need to be approved by a WTO body in order to use the system.
9 The notification will be made available publicly by the WTO Secretariat through a page on the WTO website dedicated to the system.

7.
The Council for TRIPS shall review annually the functioning of the system with a view to ensuring its effective operation and shall annually report on its operation to the General Council.

APPENDIX TO THE ANNEX TO THE TRIPS AGREEMENT

Assessment of Manufacturing Capacities in the Pharmaceutical Sector

Least-developed country Members are deemed to have insufficient or no manufacturing capacities in the pharmaceutical sector.

For other eligible importing Members insufficient or no manufacturing capacities for the product(s) in question may be established in either of the following ways:

(i) the Member in question has established that it has no manufacturing capacity in the pharmaceutical sector;

or

(ii) where the Member has some manufacturing capacity in this sector, it has examined this capacity and found that, excluding any capacity owned or controlled by the patent owner, it is currently insufficient for the purposes of meeting its needs. When it is established that such capacity has become sufficient to meet the Member's needs, the system shall no longer apply.


================================================================================
SOURCE: ─ ayurveda-aahara-regulations-2022.pdf
================================================================================

3092 GI/2022 (1)

रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल.- 33004/99 REGD. No. D. L.-33004/99

xxxGIDHxxx xxxGIDExxx असाधारण EXTRAORDINARY भाग III—खण् ड 4 PART III—Section 4 प्राजधकार से प्रकाजित
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY

भारतीय खाद्य सुरक्षा और मानक प्राजधकरण अजधसूचना नई दिल् ली, 5 मई, 2022 फा. सं. स्ट् टैंड्स /एस /एसपी-05/ए-1.वाई(01).—खाद्य सुरक्षा और मानक अजधजनयम, 2006 (2006 का संख यांक क) का धारा क2 का यपाअपेक्षा के अनुसार भारतीय खाद्य सुरक्षा और मानक प्राजधकरण का अजधसूचना सं.
फा. सं. स्ट् टैंड्स /एसपी-05/ए-1.वाई(01), तारीख 0.06.2021 द्वारा खाद्य सुरक्षा और मानक (आयुवेि आहार) जवजनयम, 2021 का प्रारूप उससे प्रभाजवत होने वाले लोगों से भारत के रािपत्र, असाधारण, भाग III, खंड 4 में उस तारीख से साठ दिनों का अवजध के भीतर आपजियााँ और सुझाव आमंजत्रत करते हुए प्रकाजित दकया गया पा, जिस जतजप को उस अजधसूचना को प्रकाजित करने वाले रािपत्र का प्रजतयााँ िनता को उपलब् ध कराई गई पं;
और उक् त रािपत्र का प्रजतयााँ िनता को 05 िुलाई, 2021 को उपलब् ध करा िी गई पं;
और उक् त जवजनयमों के प्रारूप पर िनता से प्रा् त आपजियों और सुझावों पर भारतीय खाद्य सुरक्षा और मानक प्राजधकरण द्वारा जवचार कर जलया गया है;
अत: अब उक् त अजधजनयम का धारा क2 का उप-धारा (2) के खंड (ङ) द्वारा प्रित त िजियों का प्रयोग करते हुए और केंद्रीय सरकार के पूवा नुमोिन से भारतीय खाद्य सुरक्षा ओर मानक प्राजधकरण जनम् नजलजखत जवजनयम बनाती है, अपा त ,-
1. (1) इन जवजनयमों का संजक्षप्त नाम ‘खाद्य सुरक्षा और मानक (आयुवेि आहार) जवजनयम, 2022 है। (2) ये भारत के रािपत्र में प्रकािन का जतजप से लागू होंगे। सं. 240] नई दिल्ली, िुक्रवार, मई 6, 2022/वैिाख 16, 1944

No. 240] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, MAY 6, 2022/VAISAKHA 16, 1944

सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-07052022-235642 CG-DL-E-07052022-235642 सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-07052022-235642 CG-DL-E-07052022-235642

2. पररभाषाएाँ:
(क) ‘’अजधजनयम’’ से खाद्य सुरक्षा और मानक अजधजनयम, 2006 (2006 का संख यांक क) अजभप्रेत है;
(ख) ‘‘खाद्य प्राजधकरण’’ से अजधजनयम का धारा क के अधीन स्ट् पाजपत भारतीय खाद्य सुरक्षा और मानक प्राजधकरण (एफ.एस.एस.ए.आई) अजभप्रेत है;
(ग) ‘‘आयुवेि आहार’’ से वह खाद्य अजभप्रेत है, िो इन जवजनयमों का अनुसूची ‘क’ में सूचीबद्ध आयुवेि का प्रामाजणक पुस्ट् तकों में उजल्लजखत नुस्ट् खों अपवा संोटकों और/अपवा पद्धजतयों में जवजहत प्रदक्रया के अनुसार तैयार दकया गया हो। जिसके अंतग त वे उत् पाि भी सजम्मजलत हैं, जिनमें आयुवेदिक आहार का अवधारणा के अनुसार अन् य वानस्ट् पजतक संोटक हों, परंतु इसमें औषध और प्रसाधन सामग्री अजधजनयम, 1940 का अनुसूची ‘ङ’ और औषध और प्रसाधन सामग्री जनयम, 1कक5 में सूचीबद्ध आयुवेदिक औषजधयााँ अपवा माजलकाना आयुवेदिक भेषि औषध तपा औषध उत् पाि, प्रसाधन सामग्री, स्ट् वापक अपवा मन:प्रभावी पिाप , िडी-बूरटयााँ; धातु- आधाररत आयुवेदिक औषजधयााँ अपवा िवाएाँ, भस्ट् म अपवा जप् टी और प्राजधकरण द्वारा समय-समय पर अजधसूजचत अन् य कोई संोटक सजम्मजलत नहं हैं। स्ट्पष्टीकरण 1:- ‘खाद्य’ खाद्य सुरक्षा और मानक अजधजनयम, 2006 तपा उसके तहत बने जवजनयमों में पररभाजषत है। जनर्ि ् ट रोगों, जवकारों के िौरान अपवा उनके बाि सेवन के जलए जवजहत खाद्य पिापों सजहत स्ट् वास्ट् ् य बनाए रखने अपवा जवजि् ट िारीररक आव् यकतां का पू्त के जलए अनुसूची ‘क’ में व्ण त प्रामाजणक पुस्ट् तकों में जवजहत नुस्ट् खों और संोटकों को आयुवेि में प् य कहा गया है और उन् हें इन जवजनयमों में िाजमल दकया गया है। स्ट्पष्टीकरण 2 : अनूसूची ‘क’ में जनर्ि ् ट अपवा उजल्लजखत प्रामाजणक पुस्ट् तकों में जनर्ि ् ट आयुवेदिक आहार का औद्योजगक स्ट् तर पर उत् पािन हेतु पकाई अपवा तैयारी और पैंकंग करने का प्रदक्रयां का अंगीकरण अनुमत है। ऐसे अंगीकरण का ध् येय इन जवजनयमों का अनुसूची ‘क’ में उजल्लजखत पुस्ट् तकों में जनर्ि ् ट गुणता और लक्षण वाले आयुवेि आहार का उत् पािन करना हो। स्ट्पष्टीकरण : भारतीय खाद्य सुरक्षा और मानक प्राजधकरण में जवजनर्ि ् ट अन् य खाद्यों सजहत िैजनक िीवन में आहार जवषयक प्रयोिन के जलए प्रयुक् त कोई पैकबंि खाद्य वस्ट् तु, यपा िालें, चावल, आटा, सब् िी िब तक इन जवजनयमों का अपेक्षां का पू्त नहं करते, तब तक इन जवजनयमों के अंतग त नहं आएाँगे। न् यूनतम प्रसंस्ट् कृत, यपा-धोए हुए, धूल झाडे हुए, पॉजलि दकए हुए, जिलका उतारे हुए, ग्रेडडंग दकए हुए खाद्य इन जवजनयमों के अधीन नहं आएाँगे। (ो) ‘‘अनुसूची’’ से अजभप्रेत इन जवजनयमों का अनुसूची अजभप्रेत है। . सामान् य अपेक्षाएाँ:
(1) खाद्य कारोबारी आयुवेि आहार का उत् पािन इन जवजनयमों का अनुसूची ‘ख’ में जवजहत प्रवगो और अपेक्षां के अनुसार करेगा। (2) कोई व् यजि 2क माह तक के जििुं को जखलाने के जलए आिजयत आयुवेि आहार का उत् पािन अपवा उसका जबक्रा नहं करेगा। ( ) खाद्य कारोबाररयों द्वारा आयुवेि आहार का उत् पािन खाद्य सुरक्षा और मानक (खाद्य कारबार का अनुञापापन और रजिस्ट् रीकरण) जवजनयम, 2011 का अनुसूची क के अनुसार दकया िाएगा। (क) आयुवेि आहार में जवटाजमनों, खजनिों और एजमनो एजसडों का योिन अनुमत नहं है। तपाजप, आयुवेि आहार में प्राकृजतक खजनि मौिूि होने पर उन् हें लेबल पर ोोजषत दकया िा सकता है। (5) खाद्य कारोबारी संोटकों का िुद्धता संबंधी मानिंड खाद्य सुरक्षा और मानक जवजनयमों अपवा सामान् यत: मान् य भेषिकोिों (यपा इंजडयन फामा कोपोइया, आयुवेदिक फॉमा कोपाइया ऑफ इंजडया, जिरटि फॉमा कोपोइया, यूनाइटेड स्ट् टेट्स स फॉमा कोपोइया), अपवा संबंजधत बी.आई.एस जवजिजष्टयों, अपवा भारतीय जचदकत्सा अनुिंधन पररषि द्वारा प्रकाजित ‘भारतीय जचदकत्सय पौधों का गुणविा मानक’ के अनुसार अंगीकृत कर सकते हैं। खाद्य कारोबारी संोटकों के जलए अंगीकृत िुद्धता संबंधी मानिंडों का सूचना लाइसेंडसंग के समय अपवा बाि में दकए गए दकसी पररवत न के समय िेगा।

क. सहयोज् य: इन जवजनयमों में िाजमल उत् पािों में इन जवजनयमों का अनुसूची ‘ग’ में यपाजवजहत प्राकृजतक खाद्य सहयोज् य ही होंगे।
5. संिूषक: इन जवजनयमों में िाजमल उत् पाि इन जवजनयमों का अनुसूची ‘ो में जवजहत सुरक्षा अपेक्षां के अनुरूप हो।
6. पैकेडिंग : आयुवेि आहार खाद्य सुरक्षा और मानक (पैकेडिंग) जवजनयम, 2018 के अनुरूप हो।
7. आयुवेि आहार के जवक्रय , जवजनमा ण आदि पर प्रजतबन्ध: कोई व् यजि इन जवजनयमों में अजधकजपत अपेक्षां के प्रजत अनुरूपता सुजनजित कराए जबना आयुवेि आहार का उत् पािन, उसका पैंकंग, जबक्रा नहं करेगा, उसे जबक्रा के जलए पेि नहं करेगा, उसका जवपणन नहं करेगा अपवा अन् यपा उसका जवतरण या आयात नहं करेगा।
8. मानव रोग आदि के उपचार का िावे नहं करेगा: लेबडलंग, प्रस्ट् तुतीकरण और जवञापापन में यह िावा न दकया िाए दक आयुवेि आहार में कोई मानव रोग न होने िेने, उसका उपचार करने अपवा इलाि करने का गुणधम है अपवा ऐसे गुणधमों का संिभ न दिया िाए। क. खाद्य कारोबारी प्रचालक द्वारा िावा: (1) खाद्य कारोबारी अपने िावे खाद्य सुरक्षा और मानक (जवञापापन और िावे) जवजनयम, 2018 के अनुसार करेगा। (2) आयुवेि आहार का जवजभन् न प्रवगो के संबंध में स्ट् वास्ट् ् य के संबंध में और रोग कम करने के संबंध में िावे इन जवजनयमों का अनुसूची ‘ख’ में जवजहत अपेक्षां के अनुसार होंगे।
10. आयुवेि आहार का पूव अनुमोिन: जिस आयुवेि आहार के जलए इन जवजनयमों का अनुसूची ‘ख’ के अनुसार अनुमोिन का आव् यकता हो, वह खाद्य सुरक्षा और मानक (गैर-जनर्ि ् ट खाद्यऔर खाद्य संोटकों का अनुमोिन) जवजनयम,2017 के अनुसार दिया िाएगा।
11. जविेषञाप सजमजत का गठन: आयुष मंत्रालय ऊपर उप-जवजनयम (क) और (10) में यपा जवजहत िावों और उत् पािों के अनुमोिन के संबंध में जसफाररि करने के जलए भारतीय खाद्य सुरक्षा और मानक प्राजधकरण के प्रजतजनजधयों सजहत उपयुक् त जविेषञापों वाली एक जविेषञाप सजमजत का गठन करेगा। ऐसी सजमजत को आयुवेि आहार के रजिस्ट्रीकरण/लाइसेंडसंग/प्रमाणन/प्रयोगिाला प्रत् यायन/परीक्षण/गुणता संबंधी मुदों ों का समाधान करने का भी िजि होगी।
12. आयुवेि आहार का लेबडलंग : आयुवेि आहार का लेबडलंग खाद्य सुरक्षा और मानक (लेबडलंग और प्रिि ) जवजनयम, 2020 के अनुसार तपा इन जवजनयमों में िी गई जवजि् ट लेबडलंग अपेक्षां के अनुसार हो। 1 . आयुवेि आहार का अन्य अपेक्षा: आयुवेि आहार के प्रत् येक लेब ल पर आिजयत प्रयोिन, लजक्षत उपभोक् ता समूह, उपयोग का अनुिंजसत अवजध तपा अन् य जवजि् ट लेबडलंग अपेक्षाएाँ स्ट् प् ट रूप से अंदकत हों, अपा त ,- (क) उत् पाि के नाम अपवा िांड नाम के जबल् कुल जनकट मुदद्रत ‘‘आयुवेि आहार’’ िब् ि; तपा पैक के सम् मुख भाग पर लेबल पर इन जवजनयमों का अनुसूची ‘ङ’ में यपा-जवजहत लोगो। (ख) प्रमुख रूप से जलजखत परामि के रूप में यह चेतावनी - ‘केवल आहाररक उपयोग के जलए’;
(ग) यह कपन दक आयुवेि आहार का उपयोग दकसी पररव्त त आहार के जवकल् प के रूप में नहं दकया िाएगा;
(ो) सेवन के समय के जलए चेतावनी अपवा बरती िाने वाली अन् य कोई सावधानी, ञापात साइड इफेक् ट, यदि कोई हो, अंत्व रोध, तपा प्रकाजित उत् पाि अपवा औषधीय प्रजतदक्रयाएाँ, िो भी लागू हों; और (ङ) यह बयानदक उत् पाि का भंडारण ब चों का पहुाँच से िूर दकया िाए। (च) यह चेतावनी दक उत् पाि केवल मुाँह से जलया िाए और यह आंत्रेतर उपयोग के जलए नहं है। 1क. खाद्य प्राजधकरण को खाद्य कारोबारी द्वारा सूचना: खाद्य कारोबारी लाइसेंडसंग प्राजधकारी को यह जलजखत में सूजचत करेंगे दक उनका कोई जवधमान खाद्य उत् पाि आयुवेि आहार के रूप में जवजधवत रूप से अनुञापजप्तधारी है और अनुञापजप्त प्राजधकारी इन जवजनयमों में जवजहत लेबडलंग सजहत लागू संिोधनों सजहत उसका अनुमजत जविेषञाप सजमजत का जसफाररि प्रा् त होने के 0 दिनों के अंिर िेगा।

अनुसूची ‘क’ [जवजनयम 2(ख) िेखे ] आयुवेि आहार के जलए प्रमाजणक पुस्ट् तकों का सूची क्रम सं.
पुस्ट् तक
1.

अजभनवडचंतामजण
2.

अक प्रकाि
3.

आरोग् यकल् पद्रुम
4.

आय जभषक
5.

अ् टांगयिय
6.

अ् टांगसंग्रह
7.

आयुवेि डचंतामजण
8.

आयुवेि कल् पद्रुम
9.

आयुवेि प्रकाि
10.
आयुवेि रत् नाकर
11.
आयुवेि संग्रह
12.
बङ्गसेन
13.
आयुवेदिक फॉमुलरी ऑफ इंजडया
14.
आयुवेि सार संग्रह
15.
आयुवेदिक फॉमा कोपोइया ऑफ इंजडया
16.
भैषज् यरत् नावली
17.
भावप्रकाि
18.
भेलसंजहता
19.
भोिनकुतुहलम
20.
बृहत्भैषज् यरत् नाकर
21.
बृहजिोण्टुरत् नाकर
22.
चक्र ित् ता
23.
चरकसंजहता
24.
द्रव् यगुणजनोण्टु
25.
गिजनग्रह
26.
हरमेखला
27.
कैिेवजनोण्टु
28.
क् यपसंजहता
29.
क्षेमकुतुहलम
30.
कुपीपक् वरसायन
31.
मिनपालजनोंटु
32.
मानसोल् लास/अजभलाषीतारा डचंतामजण
33.
जनोण्टुरत् नाकर
34.
नल पाकप ण
35.
प् यअप् यजवजन् चय
36.
रािजनोण्टु

37.
रस चंिनंिु
38.
रस प्रिीजपका
39.
रस राि सुंिर
40.
रस रत् नसमु चय
41.
रसतंत्र सार व जसद्ध प्रयोगसंग्रह – भाग 1
42.
रस तरंजगणी
43.
रस योग रत् नाकर
44.
रस योग सागर
45.
रस योग संग्रह
46.
रस मंजिरी
47.
रसामृत
48.
रसेंद्र सार-संग्रह
49.
रुजचवधु गला रत् नमाला
50.
सहस्रयोग
51.
सव रोगजचदकत् सारत् नम
52.
सव योगजचदकत् सारत् नम
53.
िाङग धरसंजहता
54.
िोधलाजनोण्टु
55.
जसद्ध भैषज् यमजणमाला
56.
जसद्ध योग संग्रह
57.
जिव तत् वरत् नाकर 2
58.
सूपिास्ट् त्र ऑफ मंगरसा
59.
सुषेणजनोण्टु/आयुवेिमहोिजध
60.
सूश्रुतसंजहता
61.
वैद्यडचंतामजण
62.
वैद्यकजचदकत् सा सार
63.
वैद्यकिब् िडसंधु
64.
वासवरािीयम
65.
जवद्यािीवन
66.
जव् वनापजचदकत् सा
67.
वृण् िजचदकत् सा
68.
योगडचंतामजण
69.
योग रत् नाकर
70.
योग तरंजगणी
71.
योगरत् नसंग्रह

*रट् पण 1: उपयु क् त प्रा माजण क पुस्ट् तकों के मौजलक संस्ट् करणों तपा 1कक0 से पहले जलजखत और प्रकाजित प्रा माजण क पाठों में उजल्लजखत संोटकों और नुस्ट् खों पर आयुवेदिक आहार के रूप में अनुमोिन हेतु जवचार दकया िाएगा। रट् पण 2 : अनुसूची ‘क’ में सजम्मजलत प्रा माजण क पुस्ट् तकों के पररजि् ट अपवा अनुबंध में सजम्मजलत संोटकों और नुस्ट् खों पर आयुवेि आहार के रूप में अनुमोिन हेतु जवचार नहं दकया िाएगा।

अनुसूची ‘ख’ [जवजनयम (1) िेखे] आयुवेि आहार के प्रवग और जवजनयमात् मक अपेक्षाएाँ प्रवग (1) जववरण (2) सामग्री अनुमत और प्रदकया ( ) सुरक्षा डाटा (पूव अनुमोिन उत्पाि) (क) लेबल िावा प्रकाजित साजहत् य (5) रोग िोजखम न्यूनीकरण क अनुसूची ‘क’ में सूचीबद्ध पुस्ट्तकों में प्राजधकृत आयुवेि ग्रन्प के अनुसार तैयार आयुवेि आहार अनुसूची ‘क’ में सूचीबद्ध पुस्ट्तकों में प्राजधकृत आयुवेि ग्रन्प में यपाउपबंजधत अपेजक्षत नहं खाद्य प्राजधकरण के पूव अनुमोिन अपेजक्षत नहं है यदि िावा अनुसूची क में सूजचवद्ध पुस्ट्तकों में प्राजधकृत आयुवेि ग्रन्प के अनुसार है अपेजक्षत खाद्य प्राजधकरण के पूव अनुमोिन पर आधाररत साक्ष्य ख आयुवेि ग्रन्प में आयुवेि आहार जसधान्तो (िैसे रस , गुण , वीय जवपका और कम ) में उपयोग दकया िाने वाले अन्य वनस्ट्पजत जवञापानं के साप अनुसूची क में सूचीबद्ध पुस्ट्तकों में प्राजधकृत आयुवेि ग्रन्प में सूजचवद्ध सामग्री में प्रयोग करने वाला आयुवेि आहार का उपयोग करने का एक नया नुस्ट्खा अनुसूची ‘क’ में सूचीबद्ध पुस्ट्तकों में प्राजधकृत आयुवेि ग्रन्प में उपबंध दकया गया एक नया या सामग्री है अपेजक्षत (तक संगत और सुरक्षा डाटा (अनुवांजिकता, कैंसरिन्यता और टेराटोिेजनकाटी पररक्षण) नए नुस्ट्खा के या समप न प्रकाजित आधुजनक वैञापाजनक प्रमाण) अनुसूची क में सूचीबद्ध पुस्ट्तकों में प्राजधकृत आयुवेि ग्रन्प के आधार पर पूव अनुमोिन प्राप्त दकया गया अपेजक्षत खाद्य प्राजधकरण के पूव अनुमोिन पर आधाररत साक्ष्य ख 1 अनुसूची ‘क’ में सूचीबद्ध पुस्ट्तकों में प्राजधकृत आयुवेि ग्रन्प में जनर्ि ष्ट जवजभन्न प्रारूप को आयुवेि आहार में प्रस्ट्तुत दकया गया अनुसूची ‘क’ में सूचीबद्ध पुस्ट्तकों में प्राजधकृत आयुवेि ग्रन्प में यपाउपबंजधत अपेजक्षत नहं खाद्य प्राजधकरण के पूव अनुमोिन के जलए अपेजक्षत लजक्षत िनसाँखया सजहत नए प्रारूप का औजचत्य और प्रभावकारीता डाटा अपेजक्षत खाद्य प्राजधकरण के पूव अनुमोिन पर आधाररत साक्ष्य ख 2 अनुसूची ‘क’ में सूचीबद्ध पुस्ट्तकों में प्राजधकृत आयुवेि ग्रन्प में जवजि् ट रोग ििा या जवकार जनर्ि ष्ट नहं है , का सहायता के जलए एक सहायक के रूप में या स्ट्वास्ट््य लाभ प्रिान करने के आिय से आयुवेि आहार अनुसूची ‘क’ में सूचीबद्ध पुस्ट्तकों में प्राजधकृत आयुवेि ग्रन्प में यपाउपबंजधत अपेजक्षत नहं खाद्य प्राजधकरण के पूव अनुमोिन के जलए अपेजक्षत लजक्षत िनसाँखया सजहत जवजिष्ट जचदकत्सा उदों े् य के जलए औजचत्य और प्रभावकारीता डाटा अपेजक्षत खाद्य प्राजधकरण के पूव अनुमोिन पर आधाररत साक्ष्य

रट् पण 1 : खाद्य प्राजधकरण समय-समय पर ऊपर श्रेणी‘क’में सजम्मजलत आयुवेि आहार का सूची िे सकती है। खाद्य प्राजधकरण द्वारा इस सूची में योिन/जवलोपन/ संिोधन के बारे में िनता को समय-समय पर सूचना िी िाएगी। ऐसे उत् पािों का उत् पािन करने वाले खाद्य कारोबारी प्राजधकरण से दकसी पूवा नुमोिन के जबना लाइसेंडसंग प्राजधकारी से संपक कर सकते हैं। प्रवग ‘क’ के अंतग त आने वाले परंतु सूची में न उजल्लजखत आयुवेि आहार उत् पािों का जस्ट्पजत में खाद्य कारोबारी उन् हें सूची में िाजमल करने के जलए खाद्य प्राजधकरण को अनुसूची ‘क’ में सजम्मजलत ग्रंपों से आजधकाररक संगत पाठ प्रस्ट् तुत करते हुए अनुरोध करेंगे। रट् पणी 2 : पूव पैकेिबंि रूप में प्रस्ट् तुतीकरण के उपयुक् त होने के कारण आयुवेि आहार के फोरमैट, जिसमें उपयोग से पहले पुन: संोटन हेतु उसके फोरमैट में बिलाव सजम्मजलत है, के अंगीकरण मात्र से फोरमैट में पररवत न अजभप्रेत नहं है। अनुसूची ‘ग’ (जवजनयम क िेखे) आयुवेि आहार में अनुमत सहयोज्य पिापों का सूची क्र .
स .

खाद्य सहयोज्य पिाप अजधकतम अनुमत स्ट् तर प्रयोिन वग
1.
ग् वार अरैजबक/बबूल गोंि (आईएनएस क1क) 2%

प्रगाढ़क जस्ट्परीकारक
2.
रैगाकैंप गोंि 2%
3.
ग्वार गोंि (आईएनएस क12) 2% क.
पेजक्टन (आईएनएस कक0) िीएमपी*
5.
कराया गोंि (आईएनएस क16) िीएमपी*
6.
कोंिैक फ्लोर(आईएनएस क25) िीएमपी*
7.
मांड तपा एफ.एस.एस.आर में अनुमत मांड व् युत् पन् न िीएमपी*
8.
िहि िीएमपी*

जमठासकारी एिेंट

9.
गुड िीएमपी*
10.
खिूर का जसरप िीएमपी*
11.
खंडसारी 5%
12.
करक् यूजमन [आईएनएस 100 (i)] िीएमपी*

13.
हल् िी [आईएनएस 100 (i i)] िीएमपी*

रंग
14.
पापररका/पापररका सत् त/पापररका ओजलयो रेजिन [आईएनएस 160C (i i)] िीएमपी*
15.
एन् नाटो सत् त, जबजक्सन-आधाररत [आईएनएस 160b (i i)] 100 जमग्रा/दकग्रा
16.
एन् नाटो सत् त, जबजक्सन-आधाररत [आईएनएस 160b ( i)] 50 जमग्रा/दकग्रा
17.
क् लोरोदफल ‘ए’ और क् लोरोदफल ’बी’ (आईएनएस 1क0) 100 जमग्रा/दकग्रा
18.
एंपोसायजनन (आईएनएस 1क ) िीएमपी*
19.
कैरामल सािा (150ए) िीएमपी*
20.
एफ.एस.एस.आर में व्ण त दकसी रंगीन फल अपवा सब् िी का सांद्र िल सत् त (रंिक खाद्य) िीएमपी*

21.
एसेरटक एजसड (आईएनएस 260) िीएमपी*

एजसजडटी जवजनयामक
22.
डीएल-लैजक्टक एजसड (आईएनएस 20) िीएमपी*
23.
जसररक एजसड (आईएनएस 0) िीएमपी*
24.
टारअैररक एजसड(आईएनएस क) िीएमपी*
25.
डीएल-मैजलक एजसड (आईएनएस 2क6) िीएमपी*

एजसजडटी जवजनयामक
26.
एल-एस्ट् को्ब क एजसड (आईएनएस 00) िीएमपी*
27.
गुलाब का तेल 1% सुवासकारी एिेंट
28.
केवडा (केतका का तेल)
0.5%

29.
रोिमैरी तेल 1% एंटीऑक् सीडैंट
30.
मसालों के आसुत तेल 2% परररक्षी, सुवासकारी पिाप
31.
जपसे मसाले 1% सुवासकारी पिाप , रंिक पिाप

नंबू सत् त (जसररक एजसड) िीएमपी* एजसजडटी जवजनयामक, सुवासवध क
*खाद्य में योजित सहयोज् य पिाप का मात्रा उसके अपेजक्षत प्रभाव िेने के जलए आव् यक न् यूनतम संभव स्ट् तर तक सीजमत हो। अनुसूची ‘ो’ (जवजनयम 5 िेखे ) आयुवेि आहार के सूक्ष्मिैजवक मानक सारणी 1क. प्रक्रमगत स्ट्विता के मानिंड क्रम सं.
उत् पाि का जववरण एरोबी ् लेट गणना (सी ऍफ़ यु /ग्रा. या जमली ग्रा.) फफूाँिी और कवक गणना (सी ऍफ़ यु /ग्रा. या जमली ग्रा.) एंटीरोबैक् टीररयासी गणना (सी ऍफ़ यु /ग्रा. या जमली ग्रा.) प्रजतचयन योिना सीमा प्रजतचयन योिना सीमा प्रजतचयन योिना सीमा n c m M n c m M n c m M

अप्रसंस्ट् कृत आयुवेि आहार तपा सीधे सेवन के जलए नहं

सीधे सेवन के जलए आयुवेि आहार

आयुवेि आहार, दकजण्वत उत् पाि* लागु नहं होता

लागु नहं होता

लागु नहं होता

परीक्षण पद्धजतयााँ आई एस : 5402/ आई एस ओ :4833 आई एस : 5403/ आई एस ओ 21527 भाग 1 और भाग 2 आई एस / आई एस ओ 7402/ ISO 21528 भाग 2

सारणी 1-ख खाद्य सुरक्षा मानिंड क्रम सं.
उत् पाि का जववरण सेलमोनेला जलस्ट् टीररया मोनोसाइटोिीन प्रजतचयन योिना सीमा प्रजतचयन योिना सीमा n c m M n c m M

अप्रसंस्ट् कृत आयुवेि आहार तपा सीधे सेवन के जलए नहं लागु नहं होता लागु नहं होता

सीधे सेवन के जलए आयुवेि आहार

अनुपजस्ट्पत/25 ग्रा

अनुपजस्ट्पत/25 ग्रा

आयुवेि आहार, दकजण्वत उत् पाि*

अनुपजस्ट्पत/25 ग्रा

अनुपजस्ट्पत/25 ग्रा क परीक्षण पद्धजतयााँ आई एस : 5887 भाग / आई एस ओ : 6579 आई एस : 14988 भाग 1/ आई एस ओ : 11290-1

*इसमें लेबल में दकए गए िावे के स्ट् तर पर केवल जवजहत सूक्ष् मिीवाणु ही हों। गणना सूक्ष् मिीवाणुं के जलए उपयुक् त पद्धजत का प्रयोग करते हुए का िाए अपा त लैजक्टक एजसड बैक् टीररया के जलए आई एस ओ 15214/ आई एस 16068 और बाइफाइडोबैक् टीररया के जलए आई एस ओ 29981.
रट् पण : उ च कामत के अल् प आयतनी (100 ग्रा से न् यून) और बडे खुिरा पैक (1 दकग्रा से बडा पैक) साइि का प्रजतचयन योिना में भारतीय खाद्य सुरक्षा और मानक प्राजधकरण के पूवा नुमोिन से मामले के अनुसार संिोधन दकया िा सकता है (उिाहरण के जलए पहले पैक के मामले में 10ग्रा अपवा 5 ग्रा में सैल् मोनेला का अनुपजस्ट्पजत अपवा एक बडे पैक के जवजभन् न स्ट् पानों से n संख या में नमूने जलए िाएाँ) चरण जिस पर सूक्ष् मिैजवक मानक लागू होंगे:
प्रक्रमगत स्ट् व िता मानिंड के रूप में जनधा ररत उत् पाि श्रेजणयों के सूक्ष् मिैजवक मानकों में उत् पािन प्रक्रम का स्ट् वीकाय काय करण ि्ि त है। इनका प्रयोग उत् पाि को बािार में िारी करने का अपेक्षा के रूप में नहं दकया िाना है। ये संकेतात् मक मान हैं, जिनके ऊपर सुधारात् मक कार वाई अपेजक्षत होती है, जिससे खाद्य जवजधयों के अनुसार प्रक्रम का स्ट् व िता बनाए रखी िा सके। ये उत् पािन प्रदक्रया के अंत में लागू होंगे। खाद्य सुरक्षा मानिंडों के रूप में सूक्ष् मिैजवक मानकों में खेप/राजि का स्ट् वीकाय ता पररभाजषत है, जिनका उत् पािन प्रदक्रया के अंत में उत पाि के संबंध में तपा बािार में उनका समाजप्त का अवजध तक पालन करना होगा। असंतोषिनक पररणाम के मामले में कार वाई प्रक्रमगत स्ट् व िता मानिंडों का पालन न दकए िाने पर खाद्य कारोबारी – खाद्य सुरक्षा और मानक (खाद्य कारबार का अनुञापापन और रजिस्ट् रीकरण) जवजनयमों का अनुसूची क में दिए गए दििा-जनिेिों का काया न् वयन सुजनजित करके प्रक्रमगत स्ट् व िता का िााँच करेगा और उसमें सुधार करेगा और यह सुजनजित करेगा दक खाद्य सुरक्षा संबंधी मानिंडों का पालन हो रहा है। प्रजतचयन योिना और माग ििी जसद्धांत जवजनयामक के जलए : साररणी 1 ख में जव्न दिष्ट जवजभन् न सूक्ष् मिैजवक मानकों के संबंध में प्रजतचयन उत् पािन इकाइयों और खुिरा स्ट् पानों, िो भी लागू हों, पर सूक्ष् मिैजवका के क्षेत्र में जविेषीकृत ञापान रखने वाले व् यजि द्वारा खाद्य सुरक्षा और मानक (खाद्य उत् पाि और खाद्य सहयोज् य) जवजनयम, 2011 तपा आईएसओ:17728(नवीनतम संस्ट् करण) का अनुपाल करते हुए अजवषाक् तीकारी तरीके से सुजनजित दकया िाए। नमूनों का जव् लेषण प्रजतचयन के 2क ोंटों के अंिर करने के जलए उनका भंडारण और पररवहन -18°C(±2°C) तापमान पर प्रिीजतत अवस्ट् पा में अपवा दिि में 2-5°C तापमान में, िो भी लागू

हो, दकया िाए, जसवाय उन उत् पािों के जिनका भंडारण उत् पािक द्वारा कक्ष तापमान पर करने का अनुिंसा हो। आिजयत नमूना इकाइयों में सूक्ष् मिैजवक िााँच के जलए परररजक्षत न डाले िाएाँ। खेप/राजि से नमूना इकाइयों का अपेजक्षत संख या उपयु क् त सारणी में िी गई प्रजतचयन योिना के अनुसार ली िाए और उसे अजधसूजचत प्रयोगिालां को भेिा िाए। ‘n’ संख या में नमूने वाले तीन सेट जलए िाएाँ (‘n’ प्रजतचयन योिना में िी गई पररभाषा के अनुसार हो, उिाहरणाप यदि n=5 हो तो, जलए िाने वाले नमूनों का कुल संख या 15 होगी)। तीन सेटों में से प्रत् येक का तीन जभन् न-जभन् न प्रत् याजयत प्रयोगिालां में परीक्षण कराया िाए। अंजतम जनण य तीन प्रत् याजयत प्रयोगिालां के पररणाम के आधार पर जलया िाए। खाद्य सुरक्षा मानिंडों के मामले में तीनों प्रयोगिालां के पररणामों में जनर्ि ् ट मानिंडों के प्रजत अनुपालन संकेजतत हो। सूक्ष् मिैजवक परीक्षण के जलए िुबारा परीक्षण करने अपवा िुबारा नमूने लेने का कोई उपबंध नहं है। प्रयोगिाला में परीक्षण ‘’संिभ परीक्षण पद्धजत’’ िीष क वाली सारणी में जवजहत पद्धजतयों के अनुसार सुजनजित कराया िाए। खाद्य कारोबार प्रचालको के जलए : सूक्ष् मिैजवक अपे क्षां के प्रजत अनुपालन का िााँच सुजनजित करने के जलए खाद्य कारोबार प्रचालक सारणी में जनर्ि ् ट सूक्ष् मिैजवक मानकों के अनुसार उपयुक् त परीक्षण करे। जनर्ि ् ट सूक्ष् मिैजवक अपेक्षां

के प्रजत अनुपालन सुजनजित करने के जलए खाद्य कारोबारी परीक्षण के बारे में स्ट् वयं जनण य ले, परन्तु दक वे खाद्य सुरक्षा और मानक (खाद्य कारबार का अनुञापापन और रजिस्ट् रीकरण) जवजनयम, 2011 में जवजहत न् यूनतम संख या, आव् यक प्रजतचयन और परीक्षण आवृजियों के अनुसार हों। खाद्य कारोबार प्रचालक केवल अपने संस्ट् पागत परीक्षण के जलए नीचे िी गई ‘’संिभ परीक्षण पद्धजतयों’’ में जवजहत पद्धजतयों के अलावा अन् य जव् लेष पद्धजतयों का उपयोग कर सकता है। तपाजप ये पद्धजतयााँ जवजनयमात् मक अनुपालन के जलए लागू नहं होंगी। प्रजतचयन योिना इस मानक में प्रयुक् त वण n, c, m और M के जनम् नजलजखत अप हैं:
n = नमूने में िाजमल इकाइयों का संख या c = 2-श्रेणी प्रजतचयन योिना के जलए m से अजधक सूक्ष् मिैजवक गणना वाली और -श्रेणी प्रजतचयन योिना के जलए m तपा M के बीच अजधकतम अनुमत इकाइयों का संख या m = 2-श्रेणी प्रजतचयन योिना में असंतोषिनक को संतोषिनक से जभन् न करने वाली सूक्ष् मिैजवक सीमा अपवा -श्रेणी प्रजतचयन योिना में संतोषिनक से स्ट् वीकरणीय। M = 3-श्रेणी प्रजतचयन योिना में असंतोषिनक को संतोषिनक से जभन् न करने वाली सूक्ष् मिैजवक सीमा पररणामों का जनवा चन:
2-वग प्रजतचयन योिना (िहााँ n, c और m जनर्ि ् ट हैं) 3- वग प्रजतचयन योिना (िहााँ n, c, m और M जनर्ि ् ट नहं हैं)
1. संतोषिनक, यदि पाए गए सभी मान ≤ m हों
2. असंतोषिनक, यदि पाए गए मानों में से एक या अजधक मान >m हो।
1. संतोषिनक, यदि पाए गए सभी मान ≤ m हों
2. स्ट् वीकरणीय, यदि अजधकतम c मान m और M के मध् य हों
3. असंतोषिनक, यदि पाए गए मानों में से एक या अजधक मान > M हों अपवा जनधा ररत c मान से अजधक मान >m हों।

संिभ परीक्षण पद्धजतयााँ : जनम् नजलजखत परीक्षण पद्धजतयों का संिभ पद्धजतयों के रूप में प्रयोग दकया िाए। प्रक्रमगत स्ट् व िता मानिंडों और खाद्य सुरक्षा मानिंडों के जलए जनर्ि ् ट आईएस/आईएसओ पद्धजतयों के साप भारतीय खाद्य सुरक्षा और मानक प्राजधकरण के खाद्य जव् लेषण पद्धजत मैनुअल (सूक्ष् मिैजवक परीक्षण) में जवजहत पद्धजतयों का भी संिभ दिया िा सकता है। परीक्षण पद्धजतयों के नवीनतम संस्ट् करण लागू होंगे। भारतीय मानक ब् यूरो द्वारा अंगीकृत आईएसओ पद्धजत (उिाहरण के जलए IS XXXX / ISO YYYY) जवजनर्ि ् ट दकए िाने पर आईएसओ पद्धजत का नवीनतम संस्ट् करण (अपवा इसका बीआईएस समतुल् य, यदि उपलब् ध हो) लागू होगा।

क्रम सं.
मानिंड संिभ परीक्षण पद्धजत
1.
एरोबी ् लेट गणना खाद्य श्रृंखला का सूक्ष् मिैजवका – सूक्ष् मिीवाणुं के आकलन का क्षैजति पद्धजत – भाग 1: ् योर ् लेट तकनीक द्वारा 30 °C पर कॉलोनी गणना – आई एस 5402/ आई एस ओ:4833
2.
फफूाँिी और कवक गणना खाद्य सामजग्रयों और पिु आहार में फफूाँिी और कवक गणना का पद्धजत - आई एस 5403 खाद्य और पिु आहार सामग्री का सूक्ष् मिैजवका – फफूाँिी और कवक आकलन का क्षैजति पद्धजत – भाग 1:0.95- आई एस ओ 21527-1 से अजधक िल सदक्रयता वाले उत् पािों में कॉलोनी गणना तकनीक खाद्य और पिु आहार सामजग्रयों का सूक्ष् मिैजवका – फफूाँिी और कवक आकलन का क्षैजति पद्धजत – भाग 2:0.95- आई एस ओ 21527-2 से न् यून िल सदक्रयता वाले उत् पािों में कॉलोनी गणना तकनीक
3.
एंटीरोबैक् टीररयासी गणना सूक्ष् मिैजवका – एंटीरोबैक् टीररयासी के पुनरुज् िीवन के जबना आकलन के सामान् य माग ििी जसद्धांत – एमपीएन तकनीका और कॉलोनी गणना तकनीक – आईएस/आईएएसओ 7क02 खाद्य और पिु आहार सामजग्रयों का सूक्ष् मिैजवका – एंटीरोबैक् टीररयासी ञापात करने और आकलन का क्षैजति पद्धजतयााँ – भाग 2: कॉलोनी गणना तकनीक – आईएसओ 21528-2
4.
सेलमोनेला खाद्य को जवषाक् त बनाने वाले बैक् टीररया ञापात करने का पद्धजतयााँ – भाग :सेलमोनेला ञापात करने का पद्धजतयों संबंधी सामान् य माग ििी जसद्धांत – आईएस 5887:भाग खाद्य और पिु आहार सामजग्रयों का सूक्ष् मिैजवका – सेलमोनेला एसपीपी.-आईएसओ 657क के आकलन का क्षैजति पद्धजत
5.
जलस्ट् टीररया मोनोसाइटोिीन खाद्य श्रृंखला का सूक्ष् मिैजवका – जिस्ट् टीररया मोनेासाइटोिीनों और जलस्ट् टीररया एसपीपी.
ञापात करने और आकलन का क्षैजति पद्धजत – भाग 1: ञापात करने का पद्धजत - आईएसओ 11290-1 खाद्य और पिु आहार सामजग्रयों का सूक्ष् मिैजवका-जलस्ट् टीररया मोनोसाइटोिीन ञापात करने और आकलन का क्षैजति पद्धजत, भाग 1:ञापात करने का पद्धजत - आईएस 14988-1

सारणी 2 : संिूषकों का अनुमत स्ट् तर संिूषक का नाम सीमा (अजधकतम) सीसा, जमग्रा प्रजत दकग्रा अपवा जमग्रा प्रजत लीटर
2.5 तााँबा, जमग्रा प्रजत दकग्रा अपवा जमग्रा प्रजत लीटर

आसेजनक, जमग्रा प्रजत दकग्रा अपवा जमग्रा प्रजत लीटर
1.1 रटन, जमग्रा प्रजत दकग्रा अपवा जमग्रा प्रजत लीटर

कैडजमयम, जमग्रा प्रजत दकग्रा अपवा जमग्रा प्रजत लीटर
1.5 पारा, जमग्रा प्रजत दकग्रा अपवा जमग्रा प्रजत लीटर
1.0 जमपाइल मरकरी (तत् व रूप में पररकजलत), जमग्रा प्रजत दकग्रा अपवा जमग्रा प्रजत लीटर
0.25 कुल एफ्लाटोजक्सन*, μg प्रजत दकग्रा

एफ्लाटोजक्सन बी1*, μg प्रजत दकग्रा

मेलामाइन, जमग्रा प्रजत दकग्रा
2.5

(*सुपारी, धान् य और धान् य उत् पाि, सूखी अंिीर, जगररयों (आगे प्रसंस्ट् करण के जलए और सेवन हेतु तैयार), जतलहन अपवा जतल (आगे प्रसंस्ट् करण के जलए और सेवन हेतु तैयार), िालों और मसालों/मसाला जमश्र वाले खाद्य उत् पाि) अनुसूची –ड [जवजनयम 13(क) िेखे ]

अरुण डसंोल, मुख य काय कारी अजधकारी [जवञापापन III/क/असा./61/2022-2 ]

FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS AUTHORITY OF INDIA NOTIFICATION New Delhi, the 5th May, 2022 F. No. Stds/SP-05/A-1. Y(01).—Whereas the draft of Food Safety and Standards (Ayurveda Aahara) Regulations, 2021 were published as required by section 92 of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006), vide notification of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India number F.
No. Stds/SP-05/A-1. Y(01), dated the 30th June 2021, in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part III, Section 4, inviting objections and suggestions from the persons likely to be affected thereby, before the expiry of the period of sixty days from the date on which the copies of the Official Gazette containing the said notification were made available to the public;
And whereas, the copies of the said Gazette were made available to the public on the 5th July, 2021;
And whereas the objections and suggestions received from the public in respect of the said draft regulations have been considered by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India;
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by clause (v) of sub- section (2) of section 92 of the said Act, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India with the previous approval of Central Government, hereby makes the following regulations, namely: -
1. (1) These regulations may be called as the Food Safety and Standards (Ayurveda Aahara) Regulations, 2022.
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.
2. Definitions.- (a) “Act” means the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006);
(b) “Ayurveda Aahara” means a food prepared in accordance with the recipes or ingredients or processes as per method described in the authoritative books of Ayurveda listed under ‘Schedule A’ of these regulations including products which have other botanical ingredients in accordance with the concept of Ayurveda Aahara but does not include Ayurvedic drugs or proprietary Ayurvedic medicines and medicinal products, cosmetics, narcotic or psychotropic substances, herbs listed under Schedule E-1 of Drug and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Drug and Cosmetics Rules, 1945, metals based Ayurvedic drugs or medicines, bhasma or pishti and any other ingredients notified by the Authority from time to time.
Explanation 1.- Food is defined under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006) and regulations made thereunder. Recipes and ingredients specified in the Schedule A authoritative books for promoting health or to meet specific physiological needs, including those foods specified for consumption during or post specified diseases, disorders referred as pathya in Ayurveda are covered under these regulations.
Explanation 2.- Adoption of processes for cooking or preparation of Ayurveda Aahara specified or described in the Schedule A authoritative books for industrial scale manufacture and packing are permitted. Such adoptions shall be aimed to produce Ayurveda Aahara with quality and characteristics closely similar as specified in the books mentioned under Schedule A of these regulations.
Explanation 3.- Any packed food item used in day to day life for dietary purpose such as pulses, rice, flour, vegetable including other foods specified under Food Safety and Standards Regulations shall not be covered under these regulations unless otherwise they meet the provisions of these regulations. Minimally processed food items involving cleaning, polishing, dehusking, grading shall not fall under these regulations.
(c) “Food Authority” means the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India established under section 4 of the Act;
(d) “Schedule” mean a schedule to these regulations.
3. General requirements.- (1) Food Business Operators shall formulate Ayurveda Aahara in accordance with the categories and requirements specified in Schedule B of these regulations.

(2) No person shall manufacture or sell Ayurveda Aahara intended for administration to infants up to the age of twenty-four months.
(3) The Food Business Operator shall manufacture Ayurveda Aahara in accordance with the Schedule 4 of the Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses) Regulation,
2011.
(4) No person shall add vitamins, minerals and amino acids to Ayurveda Aahara:
Provided that natural vitamins and minerals if present in the Ayurveda Aahara may be declared on the label.
(5) Food Business Operator may adopt the purity criteria for the ingredients as per the Food Safety and Standards Regulations or generally accepted by pharmacopoeias (namely, Indian Pharmacopoeia, Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India, British Pharmacopoeia, United States Pharmacopoeia), or relevant BIS Specifications, or Quality Standards of Indian Medicinal Plants as published by Indian Council of Medical Research. The Food Business Operator shall provide information on the purity criteria adopted for ingredients at the time of licensing and any subsequent changes.
4.
Additives.- The products covered under these regulations shall contain only food additives as specified in Schedule C of these regulations.
5.
Contaminants.- The products covered under these regulations shall conform to the safety requirements specified in Schedule D of these regulations.
6.
Packaging.- Ayurveda Aahara shall conform to the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018.
7.
Restriction on sale, manufacture, etc. of Aurveda Ahara.- No person shall manufacture, pack, sell, offer for sale, market or otherwise distribute or import Ayurveda Aahara unless the product complies with the requirements laid down in these regulations.
8.
Not to claim treating human disease, etc. .- The labelling, presentation and advertisement shall not claim that the Ayurveda Aahara has the property of preventing, treating or curing a human disease or refer to such properties.
9.
Claim by Food Business Operator.- (1) Food Business Operator shall make claims in accordance with the Food Safety and Standards (Advertising and Claims) Regulations, 2018.
(2) Health claims and Disease risk reduction claims for the different categories of Ayurveda Aahara and their approval process shall be in accordance with the requirements specified in Schedule B of these regulations.
10. Prior approval for Ayurveda Aahara .- If Ayurveda Aahara need prior approval as per Schedule B of these regulations, the same shall be in accordance with the Food Safety and Standards (Approval for Non-Specific Food and Food Ingredients) Regulation, 2017.
11. Constitution of Expert committee.- The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India shall constitute an Expert Committee under the Ministry of Ayush consisting of relevant experts including representatives of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India for providing recommendation on approval of claims and products as specified in sub-regulation (9) and (10) and the Committee shall also empower to address concerns regarding registration or licensing or certification or laboratory accreditation or testing or quality issues related to Ayurveda Aahara.
12. Labelling of Ayurveda Aahara .- The labelling of Ayurveda Aahara shall be in accordance with the Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and Display) Regulations, 2020, and the specific labelling requirements provided in these regulations.
13. Other requirement for Ayurveda Aahara .- Every label of Ayurveda Aahara shall specify the intended purpose, the target consumer group, recommended duration of use and other specific labelling requirements, namely:-

(a) the words “AYURVEDA AAHARA” printed in the immediate proximity of the name or brand name of the product; and the logo as specified in the Schedule E of these regulations, on the front of the pack of the label;
(b) an advisory warning ‘ONLY FOR DIETARY USE’ prominently written;
(c) a statement that the Ayurveda Aahara is not to be used as a substitute for a varied diet;
(d) a warning or any other precautions to be taken while consuming, known side effects, if any, contraindications, and published product or drug interactions, as applicable; and (e) a statement that the product is required to be stored out of reach of children.
(f) a warning that the product is for oral consumption only and not for parenteral use.
14. Information by the Food Business Operator to Food Authority.- The Food Business Operator shall inform the licensing authority in writing, if any, of his existing food products duly licensed to be assigned as an Ayurveda Aahara and the Licensing Authority shall within thirty days from the date of recommendation received from the Expert Committee, permit the same with applicable modifications including labelling as specified in these regulations.
Schedule A [See regulation 2(b)] List of authoritative books* for Ayurveda Aahara Sl. No.
Books
1.
Abhinava Chintamani
2.
Arka Prakasha
3.
Arogya Kalpadruma
4.
Arya Bishak
5.
Ashtanga Hridaya
6.
Ashtanga Samgraha
7.
Ayurveda Chintamani
8.
Ayurveda Kalpadruma
9.
Ayurveda Prakasha
10.
Ayurveda Ratnakara
11.
Ayurveda Samgraha
12.
Bangasena
13.
Ayurvedic Formulary of India
14.
Ayurveda Sara Samgraha
15.
Ayurvedic Pharmacopeia of India
16.
Bhaishajya Ratnavali
17.
Bhava Prakash
18.
Bhela Samhita
19.
Bhojana Kutuhalam
20.
Brihat Bhaishajya Ratnakar
21.
Brihat Nighantu Ratnakar

22.
Chakra Datta
23.
Charak Samhita
24.
Dravyaguna Nighantu
25.
Gada Nigraha
26.
Harame khala
27.
Kaideva Nighantu
28.
Kashyapa Samhita
29.
Ksemakutuhalam
30.
Kupi Pakva Rasayana
31.
Madanpala Nighantu
32.
Manasollasa / Abhilashitarah Chintamani
33.
Nighantu Ratnakar
34.
Paka Darpana of Nala
35.
Pathya Apathya Vinishchaya
36.
Raja Nighantu
37.
Rasa Chandanshu
38.
Rasa Pradipika
39.
Rasa Raja Sundara
40.
Rasa Ratna Samuchchaya
41.
Rasa Tantra Sara va Siddha Prayaoga Sangraha - Part 1
42.
Rasa Tarangini
43.
Rasa Yoga Ratnakar
44.
Rasa Yoga Sagara
45.
Rasa Yoga Samgraha
46.
Rasamanjiri
47.
Rasamrita
48.
Rasendra Sara Samgraha
49.
Ruchivadhu Gala Ratnamala
50.
Sahasrayoga
51.
Sarvaroga Chikitsa Ratnam
52.
Sarvayoga Chikitsa Ratnam
53.
Sharangdhara Samhita
54.
Shodhala Nighantu
55.
Siddha Bhaishajya Manimala
56.
Siddha Yoga Samgraha
57.
Siva Tatva Ratnakara II
58.
Soopa Shastra of Mangarasa III

59.
Susena Nighantu/Ayurveda Mahodadhi
60.
Sushruta Samhita
61.
Vaidya Chintamani
62.
Vaidyaka Chikitsa Sara
63.
Vaidyaka Shabda Sindhu
64.
Vasava Rajeeyam
65.
Vidya Jiwan
66.
Vishwanath Chikitsa
67.
Vrinda Chikitsa
68.
Yoga Chintamani
69.
Yoga Ratnakara
70.
Yoga Tarangini
71.
Yogaratna Samgraha

*Note 1.- Ingredients and recipes listed in the above editions of authoritative books and those authoritative texts published before 1940 shall be considered by the Food Authority for approval as Ayurveda Aahara.
Note 2.- Ingredients and recipes listed in Appendix or Annexure to the above authoritative texts in Schedule A shall not be considered by the Food Authority for approval s Ayurveda Aahara.
Schedule B [See regulation 3 (1)] Categories of Ayurveda Aahara and Regulatory Requirements Category Description Ingredients Permitted and Process

Safety Data (prior approval of product)

Label Claim Health Benefit Disease Risk Reduction (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) A Ayurveda Aahara prepared in accordance with the Authoritative Ayurveda Texts in Books listed in Schedule A.
As provided in the Authoritative Ayurveda Texts in Books listed in Schedule A Not Required Prior approval of the Food Authority not required if claim is as per the Authoritative Ayurveda Texts in Books listed in Schedule A Evidence based prior approval of the Food Authority Required B A new recipe of Ayurveda Aahara using ingredients listed in the Authoritative Ayurveda Texts in Books listed Text Reference required for using new recipe or ingredient(s) provided in the Authoritative Required (Rationale, and Safety Data (including mutagenicity, carcinogenicity, and teratogenicity testing) of the new Prior approval required based on the Authoritative Ayurveda Texts in Books listed in Schedule A Evidence based prior approval of the Food Authority Required

in Schedule A, along with other botanicals used in Ayurveda Dietetic Principles (viz.
Rasa , Guna, Virya Vipaka, and Karma) Ayurveda Books listed in Schedule A recipe or ingredient(s) or supporting published modern scientific evidence) B1 Ayurveda Aahara presented in a format different from that specified in the Authoritative Texts of Books listed in Schedule A As provided in the Authoritative Ayurveda Texts in Books listed in Schedule A (See explanatory note below) Not Required Rationale and Efficacy Data of new format including the target population, required for prior approval of the Food Authority Evidence based prior approval of the Food Authority required B2 Ayurveda Aahara intended to provide a health benefit, or as an adjuvant, to support a specific disease condition, or disorder specified/ not specified in the Authoritative Texts of Books listed in Schedule

A.
(Ayurveda Aahara for Specific Medical Purpose) As provided in the Authoritative Ayurveda Texts in Books listed in Schedule A Not Required Rationale and Efficacy Data for the specific medical purpose including the target population, required for prior approval of the Food Authority Evidence based prior approval of the Food Authority required

Note 1: The Food Authority may provide a list of Ayurveda Aahara covered under category A above from time to time. Addition or deletion or modification to this list shall be informed to the public by the Authority from time to time. Food Business Operator manufacturing such products may approach licensing Authority without need of any prior approval of the Authority. In case of Ayurveda Aahara products falling under category A, but not mentioned in the list, Food Business Operator shall request the Food Authority for inclusion by submitting relevant literature from Authoritative text listed under Schedule A books.
Note 2: The mere adoption of the Ayurveda Aahara in a format for suitability to offer it in a pre-packaged condition including concentration and drying for reconstitution prior to use may not constitute a change in format.

Schedule C [See regulation 4] List of Additives permitted in Ayurveda Aahara S.
No.
Food Additive Maximum permitted Level Functional classes
1.
Guar Arabic/ Acacia gum (INS 414) 2% Thickener, stabilizer
2.
Tragacanth gum 2%
3.
Guar gum (INS 412) 2%
4.
Pectins (INS 440) GMP*
5.
Gum Karaya (INS 416) GMP*
6.
Konjac flour (INS 425) GMP*
7.
Starch and starch derivatives permitted in FSSR GMP*
8.
Honey GMP* Sweetening agent
9.
Jaggery GMP*
10.
Date syrup GMP*
11.
Mollasses 5%
12.
Curcumin (INS 100 (i)) GMP* Colour
13.
Turmeric (INS 100 (ii)) GMP*
14.
Paprika/ Paprika Extract/ Paprika Oleoresin (INS 160C (ii)) GMP*
15.
Annatto extract, norbixin-based (INS 160b(ii)) 100 mg/kg
16.
Annatto extract, bixin-based (INS 160b(i)) 50 mg/kg
17.
Chlorophyll A and Chlorophyll B (INS
140) 100 mg/kg
18.
Anthocyanins (INS 163) GMP*
19.
Caramel plain (150a) GMP*
20.
Concentrated water extract of a colored fruit or vegetable listed under FSSR (Colouring foods) GMP*
21.
Acetic acid (INS 260) GMP* Acidity regulator
22.
DL-Lactic acid (INS 270) GMP*
23.
Citric acid (INS 330) GMP*
24.
Tartaric acid (INS 334) GMP*

25.
DL-Malic acid (INS 296) GMP*
26.
L-Ascorbic acid (INS 300) GMP*
27.
Rose oil 1% Flavouring agent
28.
Kewda/Kewra (oil from Ketaki)
0.5%
29.
Rosemary oil 1% Antioxidant
30.
Distilled oils of spices 2% Preservatives, flavouring agent
31.
Powders of spices 1% Flavouring agent, colouring agent
32.
Nibu satva (citric acid) GMP* Acidity regulator, flavour enhancer
* Quantity of the additive added to food shall be limited to the lowest possible level necessary to accomplish its desired effect.

Schedule D [See regulation 5] Microbiological Standards for Ayurevda Aahara Table 1A. Process Hygiene Criteria Sr.
No.
.
Product description Aerobic Plate Count (cfu/g or ml) Yeast and Mould Count (cfu/g or ml) Enterobacteriacae count (cfu/g or ml) Sampling plan Limit Sampling plan Limit Sampling plan Limit n c m M n c m M n c m M
1.
Ayurveda Aahara unprocessed and not for direct consumption

3 106 107

104 105

103 104
2.
Ayurveda Aahara for direct consumption

2 104 105

102 103

102 103
3.
Ayurveda Aahara fermented products* Not applicable

Not applicable

Not applicable

4.
Test Methods IS: 5402/ISO:4833 IS: 5403/ ISO 21527 Part 1 and Part 2 IS/ISO 7402/ ISO 21528 Part 2

Table 1B. Food Safety Criteria Sr.
No.
Product description Salmonella Listeria monocytogenes Sampling plan Limit Sampling plan Limit n c m M n c m M
1.
Ayurveda Aahara unprocessed and not for direct consumption NA NA
2.
Ayurveda Aahara for direct consumption

Absent/25g

Absent/25g

3.
Ayurveda Aahara fermented products*

Absent/25g

Absent/25g
4.
Test Methods IS: 5887 Part3 / ISO:6579 IS: 14988, Part 1 / ISO 11290-1
*Should contain only the specified microorganism at the level claimed on the label. The counts have to be determined using methodology appropriate for the organisms, for example for Lactic acid bacteria ISO 15214/IS 16068, for Bifidobacteria ISO29981 Note.- In high value low volume (less than 100 g) and large retail pack (pack more than 1 kg) sizes, the sample plan may be modified (eg. absence of Salmonella in 10g or 5g in the case of former or n number of samples to be taken from different sites of one large pack) accordingly on case to case basis with the prior approval of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India.
Stage where the Microbiological Standards shall apply.- The microbiological standards with respect to the products categories specified as Process Hygiene Criteria indicate the acceptable functioning of the production process. These are not to be used as requirements for releasing the products in the market.
These are indicative values above which corrective actions are required in order to maintain the hygiene of the process in compliance with food law. These shall be applicable at the end of the manufacturing process. The Microbiological Standards as Food Safety Criteria define the acceptability of a batch/lot and shall be met in respect of the products at the end of the manufacturing process and the products in the market during their shelf- life.
Action in case of unsatisfactory result.- In case of non-compliance in respect of process hygiene criteria, the Food Business Operator shall.-

check and improve process hygiene by implementation of guidelines in Schedule 4 of FSS (Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses) Regulations; and,

ensure that all food safety criteria are complied with.
Sampling Plan and Guidelines Guidelines for Regulator: The sampling for different microbiological standards specified in Table 1B shall be ensured aseptically at manufacturing units and at retail points, as applicable, by a trained person with specialized knowledge in the field of microbiology following guidelines in the Food Safety and Standards (Food Products and Food Additives) Regulations, 2011 and ISO: 17728. The samples shall be stored and transported in frozen condition at -18°C(±2°C) or under refrigerated conditions at 2-5°C as applicable except for the products that are recommended to be stored at room temperature by the manufacturer to enable initiation of analysis within twenty four hours of sampling.
Preservatives shall not be added to sample units intended for microbiological examination. The desired number of sample units as per sampling plan given in Table 1B shall be taken from same batch or lot and shall be submitted to the notified laboratories. Three sets, each containing ‘n’ number of samples (n as defined in the sampling plan eg if n=5, then total no. of samples to be drawn is 15) shall be drawn.
Each of these three sets shall be tested in three different accredited laboratories. The final decision shall be based on the results of three accredited laboratories. In the case of Food Safety Criteria, the results from all the three laboratories should indicate compliance with the specified criteria. There shall be no provision for retesting or resampling for microbiological testing. The testing in laboratory shall be ensured as per the methods given in the table “reference test methods” Guidelines for Food Business Operator: The Food Business Operator shall perform testing as appropriate as per the microbiological standards specified in the Tables to these regulations above to ensure verification of compliance with the microbiological requirements. The Food Business Operator shall decide themselves subject to minimum prescribed under Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses) Regulation,2011 , the necessary sampling and testing frequencies to ensure compliance with the specified microbiological requirements. The Food Business Operator may use analytical methods other than those described in “reference test methods” given below for inhouse testing only. However, these methods shall not be applicable for regulatory compliance purpose.
Sampling Plan:
The terms n,c,m and M used in this standard have the following meaning:
n = Number of units comprising a sample.
c = Maximum allowable number of units having microbiological counts above m for 2- class sampling plan and between m and M for 3- class sampling plan.

m = Microbiological limit that separates unsatisfactory from satisfactory in a 2- class sampling plan or acceptable from satisfactory in a 3-class sampling plan.
M = Microbiological limit that separates unsatisfactory from satisfactory in a 3-class sampling plan.
Interpretation of Results:
2-Class Sampling Plan (where n,c and m are specified) 3-Class Sampling Plan (where n,c,m and M are specified)
1. Satisfactory, if all the values observed are ≤ m
2. Unsatisfactory, if one or more of the values observed are >m
1. Satisfactory, if all the values observed are ≤ m
2. Acceptable, if a maximum of c values are between m and M.
3. Unsatisfactory, if one or more of the values observed are > M or more than prescribed c values are >m Reference test methods.- The following test methods shall be applied as reference methods. Test methods prescribed in Food Safety and Standards Authority of India Manual of Method of Analysis of Foods (Microbiological Testing) may also be referred along with the IS/ISO methods specified for Process Hygiene Criteria and Food Safety Criteria. Latest version of test methods shall apply. In case where an ISO method adopted by the BIS is specified (e.g IS XXXX / ISO YYYY), latest version of the ISO method (or its BIS equivalent, if available) shall apply.
S.NoParameter Reference Test methods
1.
Aerobic Plate Count Microbiology of the food chain -- Horizontal method for the enumeration of microorganisms -- Part 1: Colony count at 30 °C by the pour plate technique- IS 5402/ ISO:4833
2.
Yeast and Mold Count Method for Yeast and Mold Count of Food Stuffs and Animal feed- IS 5403 Microbiology of food and animal feeding Stuff-Horizontal method for the enumeration of yeasts and moulds-Part1: Colony count technique in products with water activity greater than
0.95-ISO 21527-1 Microbiology of food and animal feeding Stuff-Horizontal method for the enumeration of yeasts and moulds-Part2: Colony count technique in products with water activity less than
0.95-ISO 21527-2
3.
Enterobacteriac eae count Microbiology - General Guidance for the Enumeration of Enterobacteriaceae without Resuscitation - MPN Technique and Colony-count Technique- IS/ISO 7402 Microbiology of Food and Animal feeding stuff –Horizontal methods for the detection and enumeration of Enterobacteriaceae- Part 2:Colony- count method-ISO 21528-2
4.
Salmonella Methods for Detection of Bacteria Responsible for Food Poisoning - Part 3: General Guidance on Methods for the Detection of Salmonella- IS 5887: Part 3 Microbiology of food and animal feeding stuffs -- Horizontal method for the detection of Salmonella spp.- ISO 6579
5.
Listeria monocytogenes Microbiology of the food chain -- Horizontal method for the detection and enumeration of Listeria monocytogenes and of Listeria spp. -- Part 1: Detection method –ISO 11290-1 Microbiology of Food and Feeding Stuffs - Horizontal method for Detection and Enumeration of Listeria Monocytogenes, Part 1: Detection Method -IS 14988-1

Table 2: Permissible levels of Contaminants Name of contaminant Limits (Maximum) Lead, mg per kg or mg per L
2.5 Copper, mg per kg or mg per L

Arsenic, mg per kg or mg per L
1.1 Tin, mg per kg or mg per L

Cadmium, mg per kg or mg per L
1.5 Mercury, mg per kg or mg per L
1.0 Methyl Mercury (Calculated as the element), mg per kg or mg per L 0.25

Total Aflatoxins*, μg per kg

Aflatoxin B1*, μg per kg

Melamine, mg per kg
2.5 (*Food products containing Arecanut or Betelnut, cereal and cereal products, dried figs, nuts (for further processing and ready to eat), oilseeds or oil (for further processing and ready to eat), pulses and spices/spice mix) SCHEDULE-E [See regulation 13(a)]

ARUN SINGHAL, Chief Executive Officer [ADVT.-III/4/Exty./61/2022-23]

Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054.
MANOJ
KUMAR VERMA Digitally signed by MANOJ KUMAR VERMA Date: 2022.05.07 17:35:35 +05'30'
